Understand AI agents and Microsoft Foundry Agent Service
Completed
100 XP
8 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
An AI agent is a software service that uses generative AI to understand and perform tasks on behalf of users or other programs. Unlike traditional applications that follow predetermined rules, AI agents can operate independently by understanding context, making decisions, and taking actions to achieve specific goals. These agents combine advanced AI models with specialized tools to create intelligent automation that adapts to various scenarios.

The evolution of generative AI enables agents to behave intelligently on our behalf, transforming how we integrate AI into business processes and applications. Understanding what AI agents are and how to use them is crucial for automating tasks, making informed decisions, and enhancing user experiences.

Why AI agents are useful
AI agents provide significant value across multiple dimensions:

Automation of routine tasks - AI agents handle repetitive and mundane activities, freeing human workers to focus on strategic and creative work. This leads to measurable increases in productivity and efficiency.

Enhanced decision-making - By processing vast amounts of data and providing insights, AI agents support better decision-making. They can analyze trends, predict outcomes, and offer recommendations based on real-time information. Unlike simple chat models that only generate text, AI agents use advanced algorithms and machine learning to analyze data and make informed decisions autonomously.

Scalability - AI agents scale operations without proportional increases in human resources. Organizations can grow their capabilities without significantly increasing operational costs.

24/7 availability - Like all software, AI agents operate continuously without breaks, ensuring tasks are completed promptly and services remain available around the clock.

Examples of AI agent use cases
AI agents have diverse applications across industries:

Personal productivity agents
Personal productivity agents assist with daily tasks like scheduling meetings, sending emails, and managing to-do lists. Microsoft 365 Copilot helps users draft documents, create presentations, and analyze data within the Microsoft Office suite.

Research agents
Research agents continuously monitor trends, gather data, and generate reports. Financial services use them to track stock performance, healthcare organizations stay updated with medical research, and marketing teams analyze consumer behavior.

Sales agents
Sales agents automate lead generation and qualification. They research potential leads, send personalized follow-up messages, and schedule sales calls. This automation lets sales teams focus on closing deals rather than administrative tasks.

Customer service agents
Customer service agents handle routine inquiries, provide information, and resolve common issues. Integrated into chatbots on websites or messaging platforms, they offer instant support. For example, Cineplex uses an AI agent to process refund requests, significantly reducing handling time and improving customer satisfaction.

Developer agents
Developer agents assist with software development tasks including code review, bug fixing, and repository management. They automatically update codebases, suggest improvements, and ensure coding standards are maintained. GitHub Copilot exemplifies this type of agent.

 Tip

To learn more about GitHub Copilot, explore the GitHub Copilot fundamentals learning path.

Security considerations for AI agents
As AI agents become more autonomous and integrated into enterprise systems, they introduce security considerations beyond traditional application threats. Because agents can access sensitive data, make decisions, and act independently, you must design with security in mind from the start.

Key security risks include:

Risk Area	Description	Example Impact
Data leakage and privacy exposure	Agents often access sensitive business or user data. Without proper controls, they can unintentionally expose confidential information.	An agent summarizing internal files accidentally includes private data in customer-facing responses.
Prompt injection and manipulation attacks	Malicious users craft inputs that override an agent's intended behavior, tricking it into revealing data or performing unauthorized actions.	Hidden instructions in a message cause the agent to leak system credentials.
Unauthorized access and privilege escalation	Weak authentication or access controls let agents, or bad actors controlling them, access systems they shouldn't.	An agent connected to a CRM tool performs admin-level actions like exporting or deleting records.
Data poisoning	Attackers corrupt training or contextual data, causing agents to make biased, incorrect, or unsafe decisions.	A poisoned dataset causes a customer support agent to recommend harmful content.
Supply chain vulnerabilities	Agents rely on external APIs, plugins, or model endpoints, expanding the attack surface.	A compromised third-party plugin injects malicious code into the agent's workflow.
Over-reliance on autonomous actions	Highly autonomous agents may execute unintended actions if not carefully constrained or validated.	An agent mistakenly sends payments or publishes unverified content.
Inadequate auditability and logging	Without detailed logging, it's difficult to trace actions or detect malicious behavior early.	Security teams can't identify data misuse due to missing activity logs.
Model inversion and output leakage	Attackers might exploit model outputs to infer sensitive data used during training or prompting.	Repeated queries extract private information from a fine-tuning dataset.
Mitigation strategies
To reduce these risks, adopt a security-by-design approach that includes:

Enforcing role-based access controls (RBAC) and least privilege permissions
Adding prompt filtering and validation layers to prevent injection attacks
Sandboxing or gating sensitive operations behind human-in-the-loop approvals
Maintaining comprehensive logging and traceability for all agent actions
Auditing third-party dependencies and integrations regularly
Continuously retraining and validating models to detect data drift or poisoning attempts
By embedding these practices early in development, you can deploy AI agents safely and confidently in real-world environments.

Microsoft Foundry Agent Service overview
Microsoft Foundry Agent Service is a fully managed service designed to empower developers to securely build, deploy, and scale high-quality AI agents without managing underlying compute and storage resources. The service allows you to create agents tailored to your needs through custom instructions and advanced tools.

Previously, creating agent-like experiences required significant coding effort using standard APIs. Microsoft Foundry Agent Service handles the complexity through a streamlined interface, enabling you to build agents via the Foundry portal or in your own applications with fewer than 50 lines of code.

Agent types
Microsoft Foundry supports two primary types of agents:

Declarative agents - Agents defined through configuration rather than code. Declarative agents come in two forms:

Prompt-based agents - A single agent configured with a model, instructions, tools, and prompts. This is the most common type and the focus of this module.
Workflow agents - Multi-agent orchestrations defined in YAML, enabling complex scenarios where multiple agents collaborate to complete tasks.
Hosted agents - Containerized agents that are created and deployed in code, then hosted by the Foundry platform. Hosted agents give you full control over agent logic and execution while the platform manages infrastructure.

Understanding these agent types helps you choose the right approach for your scenarios. This module focuses primarily on declarative prompt-based agents, which provide the most accessible path to getting started.

Key features of Microsoft Foundry Agent Service
The service offers several powerful capabilities:

Automatic tool calling - The service handles the entire tool-calling lifecycle, including running the model, invoking tools, and returning results. This eliminates complex integration code.

Securely managed data - Conversation states are securely managed through the Responses API, removing the need for manual state management.

Extensive tool catalog - A rich set of built-in and community tools extends agent capabilities beyond text generation, including code execution, file search, web search, and integrations with Azure services and external APIs.

Model selection - Choose from various AI models to match your performance and cost requirements.

Enterprise-grade security - The service ensures data privacy and compliance with secure data handling, keyless authentication, and built-in content safety filters.

Customizable storage solutions - Use platform-managed storage or bring your own Azure Blob storage for full visibility and control.

Observability and tracing - Built-in monitoring capabilities help you track agent behavior, debug issues, and optimize performance in production.

These features provide a streamlined and secure way to build and deploy AI agents compared to developing with the Inference API directly.

Explore development approaches
Completed
100 XP
7 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Microsoft Foundry Agent Service provides flexibility in how you develop agents, with options ranging from visual interfaces to code-centric workflows. Understanding the different development approaches helps you choose the right tools for your scenarios and team preferences.

Foundry portal development
The Foundry portal provides a web-based interface for creating and managing AI agents without writing code. This approach is ideal when you want to quickly prototype ideas, collaborate with non-technical stakeholders, or manage agents through a centralized interface.

When to use the Foundry portal
The portal excels in these scenarios:

Quick prototyping - Rapidly test agent concepts and configurations without setting up development environments
Visual configuration - Configure agents through intuitive forms and dropdowns rather than code
Centralized management - View and manage all agents across projects in one place
Team collaboration - Share agent configurations with stakeholders who prefer visual interfaces
Resource oversight - Monitor token usage, latency, and evaluation outcomes through dashboards
The Azure portal provides immediate access to agent creation without installing additional tools. You simply navigate to your Foundry project, select the Agents section, and start building.

Visual Studio Code development
The Microsoft Foundry extension for Visual Studio Code brings enterprise-grade AI capabilities directly into your development environment. This approach suits developers who prefer working in familiar code editors and want tight integration with their development workflows.

Key capabilities of the VS Code extension
The extension organizes its features into three main sections:

Resources - Browse and manage your Foundry project assets directly from VS Code, including:

Deployed models - View and manage model deployments
Declarative agents - View and configure prompt-based and workflow agents
Hosted agents - View and manage containerized, code-deployed agents
Connections - Manage connections to external services
Vector stores - Organize document collections for File Search
Tools - Access development and testing capabilities:

Model Catalog - Browse and deploy models from the catalog
Model Playground - Experiment with models directly
Agent Playgrounds - Test agents using remote or local playgrounds
Local Visualizer - Debug and visualize agent behavior locally
Deploy Hosted Agents - Deploy containerized agents to production
Help and Feedback - Access documentation and support resources.

The extension also provides a visual Agent Designer for configuring agent properties, integrated code generation for application integration, and direct YAML configuration editing for precise control.

Screenshot of the Microsoft Foundry VS Code extension interface showing the Resources, Tools, and Help and Feedback sections.

When to use Visual Studio Code
The VS Code extension is ideal for:

Developer-centric workflows - Build agents alongside your application code in a single environment
Version control integration - Track agent configurations in Git alongside your codebase
Rapid iteration - Make quick changes and test immediately without switching tools
Code-first development - Edit YAML configurations directly for precise control
Local development - Work on agent designs offline before deploying to Azure
The extension installs directly from the Visual Studio Code Marketplace and connects to your existing Foundry projects. Detailed installation and setup steps are covered in the next unit.

Typical development workflow
Regardless of your chosen approach, agent development follows a consistent pattern:

Connect to your Microsoft Foundry project
Create an AI agent in the Foundry portal with a descriptive name and purpose
Configure agent instructions defining its behavior and capabilities (in the portal or VS Code)
Add tools to extend what the agent can do
Test the agent using integrated playgrounds
Iterate on the design based on test results
Deploy the agent to production
Integrate the agent into your applications
The Foundry portal and VS Code extension both support this workflow, differing primarily in interface style rather than capabilities.

Required Azure resources
Both development approaches require the same underlying Azure resources. To develop agents with Microsoft Foundry Agent Service, you need:

Microsoft Foundry project - Organizes your agents, models, and related assets in one place
Model deployments - Deployed AI models (such as GPT-4.1 or Claude Sonnet 4.6) that power your agents
When you create a Microsoft Foundry project, the necessary infrastructure is provisioned automatically. As you add capabilities to your agents, such as File Search or custom tools, the service seamlessly integrates any required supporting services behind the scenes. If you choose to extend the capabilities of your agent even further, for example with Foundry IQ, you may need to deploy some additional Azure services.

Optional Azure services
Depending on your agent's capabilities, you might integrate additional Azure services:

Azure AI Search - For advanced knowledge retrieval when using Foundry IQ or File Search tools
Azure Storage - For storing and managing files that agents can access
Azure Key Vault - For securely managing secrets and credentials
Azure Functions - For custom tool implementations and business logic
These services integrate with your Foundry project as needed, but aren't required to get started building agents.

Choosing your development approach
Both the Foundry portal and Visual Studio Code extension provide complete agent development capabilities. Your choice depends on your workflow preferences, team composition, and integration requirements:

Choose the Foundry portal when you want visual configuration, centralized management, or quick prototyping without local development setup.

Choose Visual Studio Code when you prefer developer-centric workflows, need tight integration with application code, or want version-controlled configuration files.

Many teams use both approaches — the portal for initial exploration and stakeholder reviews, and VS Code for detailed development and production deployments. The flexibility to switch between approaches based on your immediate needs is a key strength of Microsoft Foundry Agent Service.

Build your first agent in Microsoft Foundry
Completed
100 XP
8 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Building your first AI agent in the Foundry portal provides an accessible entry point to agent development. The portal's visual interface guides you through configuration without requiring code, making it easy to understand agent concepts while creating functional automation.

Creating an agent in the Foundry portal
The Foundry portal streamlines agent creation through an intuitive interface:

Navigate to Microsoft Foundry at https://ai.azure.com and sign in with your Azure credentials
Select your project from the list of available projects, or create a new one
Select Build > Agents in the left navigation menu
Select Create to start building a new agent
Enter agent details:
Name: Provide a descriptive name for your agent
Description: Add a clear description of the agent's purpose
Model: Select a deployed model from the dropdown, or deploy a new model
The portal creates your agent and opens the configuration interface where you can refine its behavior and capabilities.

Configuring agent instructions and properties
Agent instructions are the foundation of agent behavior. In the Instructions field, you define how your agent understands its role, responds to users, and handles various scenarios. Clear, specific instructions lead to consistent, reliable agent behavior. You'll configure instructions in more detail when working in Visual Studio Code later in this module.

Beyond instructions, the portal lets you configure model parameters such as Temperature (which controls response randomness) and Top P (which controls response diversity). These configuration options are explored further in the Visual Studio Code configuration unit.

Testing your agent in the portal
The Foundry portal includes an integrated playground for testing your agent before deployment. This testing environment lets you validate instructions, try different scenarios, and refine behavior based on results.

To test your agent, select the Playground tab and start a conversation. The playground maintains conversation history during your session, allowing you to test multi-turn interactions and verify the agent maintains context appropriately.

Adding basic tools
Before deployment, you can enhance your agent with tools from the tool catalog in the Tools section of the agent configuration (also accessible via Build > Tools in the portal). The catalog organizes tools into three categories:

Configured - Built-in tools ready to use immediately, such as Code Interpreter and File Search
Catalog - Additional tools you can add, including Bing Web Search, Azure AI Search, SharePoint, and more
Custom - Your own tools added through OpenAPI specifications or MCP servers
Tool capabilities and configuration are explored in detail in the Extend agent capabilities unit later in this module.

Deploying your agent
Once you're satisfied with your agent's behavior in testing, you can deploy it for production use. The portal provides clear deployment status indicators and generates the connection information needed to integrate the agent into your applications. After deployment, you can access the agent through the Microsoft Foundry SDK or REST APIs.

Building agents in the Foundry portal provides an accessible, visual approach to agent development. The interface guides you through configuration while offering powerful capabilities for creating sophisticated automation.

Set up Visual Studio Code for agent development
Completed
100 XP
7 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Setting up Visual Studio Code for AI agent development brings enterprise-grade capabilities directly into your familiar development environment. The Microsoft Foundry extension transforms VS Code into a comprehensive platform for building, testing, and deploying agents without leaving your editor.

Understanding the Microsoft Foundry extension
The Microsoft Foundry for Visual Studio Code extension provides direct access to Microsoft Foundry Agent Service capabilities. This extension creates an integrated experience for agent development that combines visual design tools with code-based configuration.

The extension organizes its features into three sections: Resources (for managing deployed models, declarative agents, hosted agents, connections, and vector stores), Tools (for accessing the model catalog, playgrounds, and deployment features), and Help and Feedback.

Screenshot of the Microsoft Foundry VS Code extension interface showing the Resources, Tools, and Help and Feedback sections.

Installing and configuring the extension
Setting up the Microsoft Foundry extension takes just a few minutes and requires minimal configuration.

Installation steps
Open Visual Studio Code on your machine
Select Extensions from the left pane, or press Ctrl+Shift+X (Windows/Linux) or Cmd+Shift+X (Mac)
Search for Foundry in the marketplace search box
Select the Microsoft Foundry extension from the results
Select Install to add the extension to VS Code
Wait for installation to complete (status appears in the Extensions panel)
After installation, the Microsoft Foundry icon appears in the VS Code activity bar on the left side of the window.

Connecting to Azure
Before working with agents, connect the extension to your Azure account and project:

Select the Azure icon in the VS Code activity bar
In the Azure Resources pane, sign in to your Azure account if prompted
Expand your Azure subscription in the resource tree
Expand the Foundry section to see your projects
Right-click your Microsoft Foundry project
Select Open in Foundry Extension
The extension now displays your project resources in the Microsoft Foundry panel, including existing agents, model deployments, connections, and vector stores.

Preparing for agent development
Before working with agents in VS Code, ensure you have the necessary resources deployed.

Deploying a model
Agents require deployed AI models to function. If you don't have a model deployment yet:

In the Microsoft Foundry extension, navigate to the Resources section
Expand the Model deployments subsection
Select the + (plus) icon to create a new deployment
Choose a model (such as GPT-4o or GPT-4) from the available options
Configure deployment settings:
Deployment name: Enter a descriptive name you'll use when configuring agents
Model version: Select the specific model version
Capacity settings: Configure throughput based on your needs
Select Deploy and wait for deployment to complete
The deployed model becomes available in dropdown menus when you configure agents.

Working with agents in VS Code
Agents are often created in the Foundry portal (as described in the previous unit) and then managed and configured in VS Code through the extension. Once you've created an agent in the portal, it appears automatically in the extension's Resources section.

Changes to agents in VS Code can be saved directly to Foundry, so you can work with your agent across platforms.

Managing multiple agents
As your projects grow, you'll likely manage multiple agents with different purposes. The Microsoft Foundry extension makes this straightforward:

Browse agents in the Resources view organized by project
Switch between agents by selecting them from the list
Compare configurations by opening multiple YAML files side by side
Duplicate agents to create variations without starting from scratch
Archive unused agents to keep your workspace organized
The extension maintains a clear view of all your agents, making it easy to navigate between different automation projects.

Setting up Visual Studio Code for agent development provides a powerful, integrated environment that accelerates the entire development lifecycle. With the Microsoft Foundry extension, you gain enterprise-grade agent development capabilities without leaving your familiar code editor, enabling rapid iteration and seamless deployment of intelligent automation.

Configure and manage agents in Visual Studio Code
Completed
100 XP
9 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Once you have a declarative agent (created in the Foundry portal or through the SDK), the real work begins — configuring its behavior, instructions, and properties to match your requirements. The Microsoft Foundry VS Code extension provides comprehensive configuration options through both the visual Agent Designer and direct YAML file editing, giving you flexibility in how you work.

 Note

The configuration workflow described in this unit applies to declarative prompt-based agents. Hosted agents are configured through code, and workflow agents use a different YAML schema for multi-agent orchestration.

Configuring agent properties
The Agent Designer provides an intuitive interface for setting up your agent's core properties. These settings define fundamental aspects of how your agent behaves and performs.

Essential configuration options
In the Agent Designer, you configure several key properties:

Agent name - Enter a descriptive name that clearly identifies your agent's purpose. This name appears in lists, logs, and when other developers work with your agents.

Model selection - Choose your model deployment from the dropdown. This selection determines which AI model powers your agent's responses. The dropdown shows only models you've already deployed in your project.

Description - Add a clear, concise description of what your agent does. Good descriptions help team members understand the agent's purpose without reading its instructions or code.

System instructions - Define the agent's behavior, personality, and response style. This is where you shape how your agent understands its role and interacts with users.

Agent ID - Automatically generated by the extension when you create the agent. This unique identifier is used when calling your agent through APIs.

Model configuration options
Beyond selecting a model, you can fine-tune its behavior through additional parameters:

Temperature - Controls response creativity and randomness. Lower values (0.1-0.3) produce consistent, focused outputs. Higher values (0.7-1.0) generate more creative, varied responses. For business agents handling structured tasks, values between 0.3 and 0.7 typically work well.

Top P - Controls diversity by limiting vocabulary choices during generation. Most scenarios work well with the default value of 1.0, but you can lower it for more constrained, predictable outputs.

These settings appear in both the Designer interface and the YAML file, remaining synchronized across both views.

Understanding the agent YAML structure
The YAML file contains all your declarative agent's configuration in a structured, readable format. Understanding this structure helps you make precise changes and work efficiently when the visual interface isn't the best fit.

Complete YAML example
Here's a fully configured agent YAML file:

YAML
# yaml-language-server: $schema=https://aka.ms/ai-foundry-vsc/agent/1.0.0
version: 1.0.0
name: healthcare-assistant
description: Assists healthcare staff with patient appointment scheduling and information retrieval
id: 'agent-abc123xyz'
metadata:
  authors:
    - developer-name
  tags:
    - healthcare
    - customer-service
    - scheduling
model:
  id: 'gpt-4.1'
  options:
    temperature: 0.5
    top_p: 1
instructions: |
  You're a healthcare assistant helping staff schedule patient appointments and retrieve information.

  Your responsibilities:
  - Help staff find available appointment slots
  - Answer questions about patient scheduling policies
  - Provide information about different appointment types
  - Assist with rescheduling and cancellations

  Important guidelines:
  - Never access or share patient medical information
  - Always verify appointment details before confirming
  - Be professional but friendly in all interactions
  - If you're unsure about policies, advise staff to check with management
tools: []
The YAML structure divides naturally into sections: metadata, model configuration, instructions, and tools. This organization makes it easy to locate and modify specific settings.

Benefits of YAML configuration
Direct YAML editing provides several advantages:

Version control - Track changes in Git alongside your application code
Bulk updates - Make multiple changes simultaneously with confidence
Templates - Create reusable agent templates for consistent configurations
Code review - Include agent configurations in your standard code review processes
Automation - Build scripts that generate or modify agent configurations programmatically
The extension validates YAML syntax in real-time, highlighting errors and providing suggestions as you type.

Best practices for agent configuration
As you build more complex agents, these practices help maintain quality and reliability:

Version control your YAML files - Commit agent configurations to Git alongside your application code. This enables rollback, code review, and change tracking.

Use descriptive names and tags - Clear naming and tagging make it easy to find and identify agents as your collection grows.

Document complex instructions - Include comments in your YAML files explaining why you chose specific instruction patterns or configurations.

Test after every change - Use the integrated playground to verify behavior after modifying configuration. Small changes can have unexpected effects.

Start simple, then iterate - Begin with basic instructions and add complexity based on testing results. Overly complex initial instructions are harder to debug.

Keep instructions focused - Each agent should have a clear, specific purpose. Agents trying to do too many things perform inconsistently.

Configuring agents in Visual Studio Code provides powerful capabilities for creating sophisticated automation. The combination of visual design tools and direct YAML editing enables rapid development while maintaining the precision needed for production deployments.

Extend agent capabilities with tools
Completed
100 XP
9 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
One of the most powerful features of AI agents is their ability to use tools that extend their capabilities beyond text generation. Tools enable agents to perform actions, access data, and integrate with external systems. Microsoft Foundry provides built-in tools and supports custom integrations, transforming agents from simple chat interfaces into sophisticated automation systems.

Understanding agent tools
Tools are programmatic functions that agents can invoke to complete tasks. When an agent determines that a tool is needed to respond to a user request, it automatically calls the appropriate tool, processes the results, and incorporates them into its response. This capability enables agents to work with real-time data, execute code, search knowledge bases, and interact with external services.

The tool-calling lifecycle happens automatically:

User sends a message to the agent
Agent analyzes the request and determines which tools (if any) are needed
Agent invokes the appropriate tools with relevant parameters
Tools execute and return results
Agent incorporates results into a natural language response
Response is returned to the user
This seamless integration means you can add powerful capabilities to agents without writing complex orchestration code.

Built-in tools overview
Microsoft Foundry provides a tool catalog that organizes available tools into three categories: Configured (ready-to-use built-in tools), Catalog (additional tools you can add from a registry including MCP servers), and Custom (your own tools via OpenAPI specifications or custom implementations). You can access the tool catalog through Build > Tools in the portal or through the VS Code extension.

The following are some of the most commonly used tools.

Code Interpreter
Code Interpreter enables agents to write and execute Python code in a secure, sandboxed environment. Use it for mathematical calculations, data analysis, chart generation, file processing, and complex problem-solving. For example, if a user asks an agent to "calculate the compound interest on a $10,000 investment at 5% annual rate over 10 years," the agent writes and executes Python code to compute the exact result.

File Search
File Search provides retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) by allowing agents to search through documents you've uploaded. The tool indexes your documents in a vector store and retrieves relevant information when needed, grounding agent responses in your specific knowledge base.

File Search supports PDF, Word (.docx), plain text (.txt), Markdown (.md), and other formats. When you add File Search to an agent, you create or select a vector store, upload documents, and the system automatically indexes them for semantic search.

Bing Web Search
Bing Web Search connects your agent to real-time internet information, enabling access to current events, trending topics, and information beyond training data. It includes automatic citation generation, so agents can reference their sources.

Azure AI Search
Azure AI Search provides advanced knowledge retrieval from your existing search indexes. Unlike File Search (which works with documents uploaded directly to the agent), Azure AI Search connects to enterprise-scale indexed data sources for structured and unstructured search scenarios.

OpenAPI tools
OpenAPI tools allow agents to interact with external APIs defined by OpenAPI 3.0 specifications, connecting your agents to web services and enterprise systems. You provide the specification, and Microsoft Foundry handles parameter mapping and response parsing.

Additional built-in tools
The tool catalog includes many more tools for specialized scenarios:

Tool	Description
Browser Automation	Interact with web pages, fill forms, and extract content
Computer Use	Interact with desktop applications
Image Generation	Create images based on text descriptions
SharePoint	Access SharePoint content and document libraries
Microsoft Fabric	Connect to Fabric data agents for data analytics
Deep Research	Perform in-depth research across multiple sources
Agent-to-Agent	Delegate tasks to other agents
Custom Code Interpreter	Customizable code execution for specialized environments
The tool catalog continues to expand. Check the Foundry portal for the latest available tools.

Adding tools in Visual Studio Code
The Microsoft Foundry extension provides an intuitive interface for adding and configuring tools. You can add tools through either the visual designer or by editing the YAML file directly.

Using the visual designer
To add tools through the Agent Designer:

Open your agent in the Agent Designer
Navigate to the Tools section in the configuration panel
Select Add Tool or the + icon
Browse the available tools in the tool library
Select the tool you want to add
Configure tool-specific settings if required
Save your changes
Screenshot of the tool catalog interface in the Microsoft Foundry VS Code extension.

When you add certain tools, the extension prompts you to configure related assets. For example, adding File Search lets you create or select a vector store for document indexing.

Adding tools through YAML
You can also add tools by editing the agent YAML file directly. This approach works well when you know exactly which tools you need or want to apply changes from templates.

Here's an example YAML configuration with multiple tools:

YAML
version: 1.0.0
name: research-assistant
description: Helps with research tasks using code analysis and web search
model:
  id: 'gpt-4o-deployment'
instructions: |
  You're a research assistant helping users gather and analyze information.
  Use Code Interpreter for data analysis and Bing Search for current information.
tools:
  - type: code_interpreter
  - type: bing_grounding
    bing_grounding:
      connection_id: "your-connection-id"
  - type: file_search
    file_search:
      vector_store_ids:
        - "vectorstore-123"
The tools array lists each enabled tool with its configuration. Some tools require additional parameters like connection IDs or vector store references.

Model Context Protocol (MCP) servers
Model Context Protocol (MCP) provides a standardized way to add custom tools to agents. MCP servers are available through the Catalog section of the tool catalog and offer reusable tool interfaces that work consistently across different agent implementations.

Types of MCP servers
The Foundry tool catalog supports three types of MCP servers:

Remote MCP servers - Hosted externally and accessed over the network. These are the most common type for production scenarios.
Local MCP servers - Run on your local machine during development. Useful for testing custom tools before deploying.
Custom MCP servers - Your own MCP server implementations tailored to specific needs.
Benefits of MCP servers
MCP servers provide several advantages:

Standardized protocol - Consistent tool communication patterns make integration predictable and reliable.

Reusable components - Build tools once and use them across multiple agents and projects.

Community-driven tools - Access tools built by the community through MCP registries, expanding capabilities without custom development.

Simplified integration - Consistent interfaces reduce integration complexity and maintenance burden.

Using MCP servers in VS Code
The Microsoft Foundry extension supports MCP server integration:

Browse available MCP servers through the extension's tool registry
Add MCP servers to your agent configuration
Configure server-specific settings and parameters
Test MCP server functionality in the integrated playground
Deploy agents with MCP server integrations to production
MCP servers extend your agent's capabilities with specialized functions while maintaining a consistent development experience.

Tool configuration best practices
Effective tool management ensures reliable agent performance:

Start with built-in tools before building custom solutions. Built-in tools are tested, maintained, and optimized for the platform.
Match tools to requirements - List what your agent needs to do and select tools accordingly. Don't add tools without clear purposes, as each tool adds latency.
Provide clear instructions - Tell your agent when and how to use each tool (for example, "Use Code Interpreter for any mathematical calculations") and when not to use them.
Keep knowledge bases current - When using File Search, update documents regularly. Outdated information leads to incorrect responses.
Test tool behavior thoroughly using the integrated playground. Send messages that should trigger tool usage, verify correct invocation, and test error scenarios.
Agents can use multiple tools together to handle complex scenarios. For example, a research agent might use Bing Web Search to gather current information, Code Interpreter to analyze data, and File Search to reference internal documentation — all orchestrated automatically based on the user's request.

Extending agent capabilities with tools transforms simple chat interfaces into powerful automation systems. By combining built-in tools with custom integrations and MCP servers, you can create agents that seamlessly interact with your data, systems, and services while maintaining enterprise-grade security and reliability.

More in-depth discussion on both tools and MCP servers can be found later modules.

Test, deploy, and integrate agents
Completed
100 XP
9 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Testing, deploying, and publishing agents are critical steps in moving from development to production. Microsoft Foundry provides comprehensive capabilities for validating agent behavior, deploying to your Foundry project, and publishing agents as callable endpoints that external consumers and applications can use.

Testing strategies for agents
Thorough testing ensures your agents behave reliably across diverse scenarios before reaching users. Both the Foundry portal and Visual Studio Code extension provide playgrounds for interactive testing.

Using the playground effectively:

Happy path testing - Verify the agent handles common, expected requests correctly.
Edge case testing - Try ambiguous inputs, incomplete information, and unusual requests to reveal how agents handle uncertainty.
Boundary testing - Confirm the agent respects boundaries defined in its instructions by testing out-of-scope requests.
Multi-turn conversation testing - Verify the agent maintains context across multiple exchanges and builds on previous responses.
Tool invocation testing - Verify agents call the right tools at the right times and incorporate results correctly.
Record test results to track improvements and catch regressions.

Deploying agents to your project
Microsoft Foundry supports deploying agents from the portal or Visual Studio Code. Deploying saves your agent configuration to your Foundry project so you can test and iterate.

Deploying from the Foundry portal
Navigate to your agent in the Foundry portal
Verify configuration and test results are satisfactory
Select Save from the agent's page
Confirm version and deployment settings
Deploying from Visual Studio Code
Open your agent in the AI Toolkit
Select Save to Foundry to push configuration changes
For hosted agents, open the +Build menu in the developer tools and select Deploy to Microsoft Foundry
Select your container configuration and confirm
Both approaches keep your agent within your project workspace where team members can access and test it.

Publishing agents to an endpoint
Publishing moves an agent from your project workspace into a managed Azure resource called an Agent Application. This step is what makes your agent externally callable through a stable endpoint.

What publishing creates
When you publish an agent version, Foundry creates:

Agent Application - An Azure resource with its own invocation URL, authentication policy, and Entra agent identity.
Deployment - A running instance of a specific agent version inside the application, with start/stop lifecycle management.
The key difference between deploying and publishing is scope. Deploying keeps the agent within your project. Publishing creates a dedicated endpoint that external consumers can call without needing access to your Foundry project.

Publishing from the Foundry portal
In the portal, select the agent version you want to publish
Select Publish to create the Agent Application and deployment
Publishing from Visual Studio Code
Open the Command Palette (Ctrl+Shift+P) and run Microsoft Foundry: Deploy Hosted Agent for hosted agents
Select the target workspace and container configuration
Confirm and deploy
After publishing, the agent appears in the Hosted Agents (Preview) section of the AI Toolkit extension tree view.

The Agent Application endpoint
Published agents expose a stable endpoint using the Responses API protocol:

https://<foundry-resource-name>.services.ai.azure.com/api/projects/<project-name>/applications/<app-name>/protocols/openai/responses

This URL stays the same even as you roll out new agent versions, so downstream consumers aren't disrupted by updates.

Authentication and identity
Agent Applications use Microsoft Entra ID for authentication. Callers must have the Azure AI User role on the Agent Application resource. API key authentication isn't supported for Agent Applications.

 Important

When you publish an agent, it receives its own dedicated Entra identity, separate from the project's shared identity. Permissions don't transfer automatically. You must reassign RBAC roles to the new agent identity for any resources the agent accesses. If you skip this step, tool calls that work during development fail with authorization errors once the agent is published.

Verifying the endpoint
After publishing, verify the endpoint works:

Get an access token:

Azure CLI
az account get-access-token --resource https://ai.azure.com
Call the Agent Application endpoint:

Bash
curl -X POST \
  "https://<foundry-resource-name>.services.ai.azure.com/api/projects/<project-name>/applications/<app-name>/protocols/openai/responses?api-version=2025-11-15-preview" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer <access-token>" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"input":"Say hello"}'
If you receive 403 Forbidden, confirm the caller has the Azure AI User role on the Agent Application resource.

Updating published agents
To roll out a new agent version:

Make changes in your development environment and test thoroughly
In the Foundry portal, select Publish Updates from the Agent playground
The Agent Application routes 100% of traffic to the new version automatically
The endpoint URL remains unchanged, so existing integrations continue working.

Generating integration code
The Microsoft Foundry VS Code extension generates sample integration code to connect your application to a published agent:

Select your deployed agent in the My Resources view
Select View Code
Choose your folder
The extension generates code for authenticating, connecting, sending messages, and processing responses
Integration patterns
Common patterns for integrating published agents include:

Web applications - Send user messages to the Responses API endpoint and display responses in your UI. Store conversation history client-side for multi-turn interactions.
API-driven workflows - Call the agent endpoint from backend services triggered by events or schedules. Process responses programmatically to drive downstream actions.
Chatbot interfaces - Map user sessions to conversations. Handle real-time message exchange through the endpoint.
Background automation - Schedule agent calls for recurring tasks. Feed system data into agents and process outputs to update business systems.
Production considerations
Running agents in production requires attention to several operational areas:

Monitoring - Track response times, tool invocation success rates, error patterns, and token consumption using Application Insights integration.
Security - Use managed identities for authentication, apply least-privilege access, and define data retention policies.
Cost management - Monitor token usage, set response length limits, and implement rate limiting to prevent unexpected spikes.
Error handling - Implement retry logic with exponential backoff for transient failures. Handle rate limiting with backoff strategies. Validate inputs before sending to agents.
Conversation management - Agent Application endpoints currently support only the stateless Responses API. Store conversation history in your client for multi-turn experiences.

Summary
Completed
100 XP
2 minutes
You've learned how to develop AI agents using Microsoft Foundry Agent Service through both the Foundry portal and Visual Studio Code. These flexible development approaches enable you to create intelligent automation that handles complex tasks, accesses real-time data, and integrates seamlessly with your applications.

Throughout this module, you discovered what AI agents are and why they're valuable for automating workflows and enhancing decision-making. You explored the key features of Microsoft Foundry Agent Service, including the two primary agent types — declarative agents (configured through visual designers and YAML) and hosted agents (created and deployed through code). You learned to build agents using both the visual Foundry portal and the developer-focused VS Code extension, understanding when each approach fits best.

You configured agents with clear instructions that define their behavior and personality. You extended agent capabilities using the tool catalog, which provides built-in tools like Code Interpreter, File Search, Bing Web Search, Azure AI Search, and many more, transforming simple chat interfaces into sophisticated automation systems. You tested agents using integrated playgrounds, deployed them to production environments, and generated integration code to connect agents with your applications.

With these skills, you can create AI agents that automate routine tasks, provide intelligent assistance, and integrate with your existing systems. Whether you're building customer service automation, developer productivity tools, or specialized research assistants, Microsoft Foundry Agent Service provides the foundation for reliable, scalable AI solutions.

Introduction
Completed
100 XP
2 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Microsoft Foundry Agent Service offers a seamless way to build an agent without needing extensive AI or machine learning expertise. By using tools, you can provide your agent with functionality to execute actions on your behalf.

The AI Agent Service provides built-in tools for gathering knowledge and generating code, which provide your agent with some powerful functionality. However, sometimes your agent needs to be able to complete specific tasks or actions that an AI model would struggle to handle on its own. To accomplish these actions, you can provide your agent a custom tool based on your own code or a third-party service or API.

Imagine you're working in the retail industry, and your company is struggling with managing customer inquiries efficiently. The customer support team is overwhelmed with repetitive questions, leading to delays in response times and decreased customer satisfaction. By using Foundry Agent Service with custom tools, you can create a custom FAQ agent that handles common inquiries. This agent can be provided with a set of custom tools to look up customer orders, freeing up your support team to focus on more complex issues.

In this module, you'll learn how to utilize custom tools in Foundry Agent Service to enhance productivity, improve accuracy, and create tailored solutions for specific needs.

Why use custom tools
Completed
100 XP
3 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Microsoft Foundry Agent Service offers a powerful platform for integrating custom tools to enhance productivity and provide tailored solutions for specific business needs. By using these custom tools, businesses can achieve greater efficiency and effectiveness in their operations.

Why use custom tools?
Custom tools significantly enhance productivity by automating repetitive tasks and streamlining workflows that are specific to your use case. These tools improve accuracy by providing precise and consistent outputs, reducing the likelihood of human error. Additionally, custom tools offer tailored solutions that address specific business needs, enabling organizations to optimize their processes and achieve better outcomes.

Enhanced productivity: Automate repetitive tasks and streamline workflows.
Improved accuracy: Provide precise and consistent outputs, reducing human error.
Tailored solutions: Address specific business needs and optimize processes.
Adding tools makes custom functionality available for the agent to use, depending on how it decides to respond to the user prompt. For example, consider how a custom tool to retrieve weather data from an external meteorological service could be used by an agent.

Diagram showing an agent using a custom tool t call an external meteorological service.

The diagram shows the process of an agent choosing to use the custom tool:

A user asks an agent about the weather conditions in a ski resort.
The agent determines that it has access to a tool that can use an API to get meteorological information, and calls it.
The tool returns the weather report, and the agent informs the user.
Common scenarios for custom tools in agents
Custom tools within the Foundry Agent Service enable users to extend the capabilities of AI agents, tailoring them to meet specific business needs. Some example use cases that illustrate the versatility and impact of custom tools include:

Customer support automation
Scenario: A retail company integrates a custom tool that connects the Azure AI Agent to their customer relationship management (CRM) system.
Functionality: The AI agent can retrieve customer order histories, process refunds, and provide real-time updates on shipping statuses.
Outcome: Faster resolution of customer queries, reduced workload for support teams, and improved customer satisfaction.
Inventory management
Scenario: A manufacturing company develops a custom tool to link the AI agent with their inventory management system.
Functionality: The AI agent can check stock levels, predict restocking needs using historical data, and place orders with suppliers automatically.
Outcome: Streamlined inventory processes and optimized supply chain operations.
Healthcare appointment scheduling
Scenario: A healthcare provider integrates a custom scheduling tool with the AI agent.
Functionality: The AI agent can access patient records, suggest available appointment slots, and send reminders to patients.
Outcome: Reduced administrative burden, improved patient experience, and better resource utilization.
IT Helpdesk support
Scenario: An IT department develops a custom tool to integrate the AI agent with their ticketing and knowledge base systems.
Functionality: The AI agent can troubleshoot common technical issues, escalate complex problems, and track ticket statuses.
Outcome: Faster issue resolution, reduced downtime, and improved employee productivity.
E-learning and training
Scenario: An educational institution creates a custom tool to connect the AI agent with their learning management system (LMS).
Functionality: The AI agent can recommend courses, track student progress, and answer questions about course content.
Outcome: Enhanced learning experiences, increased student engagement, and streamlined administrative tasks.
These examples demonstrate how custom tools within the Foundry Agent Service can be used across industries to address unique challenges, drive efficiency, and deliver value.

Options for implementing custom tools
Completed
100 XP
6 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Microsoft Foundry Agent Service offers various custom tools that enhance the capabilities and efficiency of your AI agents. These tools allow for scalable interoperability with various applications, making it easier to integrate with existing infrastructure or web services.

Custom tool options available in Microsoft Foundry Agent Service
Foundry Agent Service provides several custom tool options, including OpenAPI specified tools, Azure Functions, and function calling. These tools enable seamless integration with external APIs, event-driven applications, and custom functions.

Custom function: Function calling allows you to describe the structure of custom functions to an agent and return the functions that need to be called along with their arguments. The agent can dynamically identify appropriate functions based on their definitions. This feature is useful for integrating custom logic and workflows, in a selection of programming languages, into your AI agents.
Azure Functions: Azure Functions enables you to create intelligent, event-driven applications with minimal overhead. They support triggers and bindings, which simplify how your AI Agents interact with external systems and services. Triggers determine when a function executes, while bindings facilitate streamlined connections to input or output data sources.
OpenAPI specification tools: These tools allow you to connect your Azure AI Agent to an external API using an OpenAPI 3.0 specification. This provides standardized, automated, and scalable API integrations that enhance the capabilities of your agent. OpenAPI specifications describe HTTP APIs, enabling people to understand how an API works, generate client code, create tests, and apply design standards.
Azure Logic Apps: This action provides low-code/no-code solutions to add workflows and connects apps, data, and services with the low-code Logic App.
This flexibility to integrate custom functionality in multiple ways enables a wide range of extensibility possibilities for your Foundry Agent Service agents.

How to integrate custom tools
Completed
100 XP
7 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Custom tools in an agent can be defined in a handful of ways, depending on what works best for your scenario. You may find that your company already has Azure Functions implemented for your agent to use, or a public OpenAPI specification gives your agent the functionality you're looking for.

Function Calling
Function calling allows agents to execute predefined functions dynamically based on user input. This feature is ideal for scenarios where agents need to perform specific tasks, such as retrieving data or processing user queries, and can be done in code from within the agent. Your function may call out to other APIs to get additional information or initiate a program.

Example: Defining and using a function
Start by defining a function that the agent can call. For instance, here's a fake snowfall tracking function:

Python
import json

def recent_snowfall(location: str) -> str:
    """
    Fetches recent snowfall totals for a given location.
    :param location: The city name.
    :return: Snowfall details as a JSON string.
    """
    mock_snow_data = {"Seattle": "0 inches", "Denver": "2 inches"}
    snow = mock_snow_data.get(location, "Data not available.")
    return json.dumps({"location": location, "snowfall": snow})
Register the function with your agent using the Azure AI SDK:

Python
# Define a function tool for the model to use
function_tool = FunctionTool(
    name="recent_snowfall",
    parameters={
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
            "location": {"type": "string", "description": "The city name to check snowfall for."},
        },
        "required": ["location"],
        "additionalProperties": False
    },
    description="Get recent snowfall totals for a given location.",
    strict=True,
)

# Add the function tool to a list of tools for the agent
tools: list[Tool] = [function_tool]

# Create your agent with the toolset
agent = project_client.agents.create_version(
    name="snowfall-agent",
    definition=PromptAgentDefinition(
        model="gpt-4.1",
        instructions="You are a weather assistant tracking snowfall. Use the provided functions to answer questions.",
        tools=tools,
    )
)
The agent can now call recent_snowfall dynamically when it determines that the prompt requires information that can be retrieved by the function.

Azure Functions
Azure Functions provides serverless computing capabilities for real-time processing. This integration is ideal for event-driven workflows, enabling agents to respond to triggers such as HTTP requests or queue messages.

Example: Using Azure Functions with a queue trigger
First, develop and deploy your Azure Function. In this example, imagine we have a function in our Azure subscription to fetch the snowfall for a given location.

When your Azure Function is in place, add it to the agent definition as an Azure Function tool:

Python
tool = AzureFunctionTool(
    azure_function=AzureFunctionDefinition(
        input_binding=AzureFunctionBinding(
            storage_queue=AzureFunctionStorageQueue(
                queue_name="STORAGE_INPUT_QUEUE_NAME",
                queue_service_endpoint="STORAGE_QUEUE_SERVICE_ENDPOINT",
            )
        ),
        output_binding=AzureFunctionBinding(
            storage_queue=AzureFunctionStorageQueue(
                queue_name="STORAGE_OUTPUT_QUEUE_NAME",
                queue_service_endpoint="STORAGE_QUEUE_SERVICE_ENDPOINT",
            )
        ),
        function=AzureFunctionDefinitionFunction(
            name="queue_trigger",
            description="Get weather for a given location",
            parameters={
                "type": "object",
                "properties": {"location": {"type": "string", "description": "location to determine weather for"}},
            },
        ),
    )
)

agent = project_client.agents.create_version(
    agent_name="MyAgent",
    definition=PromptAgentDefinition(
        model="gpt-4.1",
        instructions="You are a helpful weather assistant. Use the provided Azure Function to get weather information for a location when needed.",
        tools=[tool],
    ),
)
The agent can now send requests to the Azure Function via a storage queue and process the results.

OpenAPI Specification
OpenAPI defined tools allow agents to interact with external APIs using standardized specifications. This approach simplifies API integration and ensures compatibility with various services. The Foundry Agent Service uses OpenAPI 3.0 specified tools.

 Tip

Currently, three authentication types are supported with OpenAPI 3.0 tools: anonymous, API key, and managed identity.

Example: Using an OpenAPI specification
First, create a JSON file (in this example, called weather_openapi.json) describing the API.

JSON
{
  "openapi": "3.1.0",
  "info": {
    "title": "get weather data",
    "description": "Retrieves current weather data for a location based on wttr.in.",
    "version": "v1.0.0"
  },
  "servers": [
    {
      "url": "https://wttr.in"
    }
  ],
  "auth": [],
  "paths": {
    "/{location}": {
      "get": {
        "description": "Get weather information for a specific location",
        "operationId": "GetCurrentWeather",
        "parameters": [
          {
            "name": "location",
            "in": "path",
            "description": "City or location to retrieve the weather for",
            "required": true,
            "schema": {
              "type": "string"
            }
          },
          {
          "name": "format",
          "in": "query",
          "description": "Always use j1 value for this parameter",
          "required": true,
          "schema": {
            "type": "string",
            "default": "j1"
          }
        }
        ],
        "responses": {
          "200": {
            "description": "Successful response",
            "content": {
              "text/plain": {
                "schema": {
                  "type": "string"
                }
              }
            }
          },
          "404": {
            "description": "Location not found"
          }
        },
        "deprecated": false
      }
    }
  },
  "components": {
    "schemes": {}
  }
}
Then, register the OpenAPI tool in the agent definition:

Python
from azure.ai.projects.models import OpenApiTool, OpenApiAnonymousAuthDetails

with open(weather_asset_file_path, "r") as f:
      openapi_weather = cast(dict[str, Any], jsonref.loads(f.read()))

tool = OpenApiTool(
    openapi=OpenApiFunctionDefinition(
        name="get_weather",
        spec=openapi_weather,
        description="Retrieve weather information for a location.",
        auth=OpenApiAnonymousAuthDetails(),
    )
)

agent = project_client.agents.create_version(
    agent_name="openapi-agent",
    definition=PromptAgentDefinition(
        model="gpt-4.1",
        instructions="You are a weather assistant. Use the API to fetch weather data.",
        tools=[openapi_tool],
    ),
)
The agent can now use the OpenAPI tool to fetch weather data dynamically.

 Note

One of the concepts related to agents and custom tools that developers often have difficulty with is the declarative nature of the solution. You don't need to write code that explicitly calls your custom tool functions - the agent itself decides to call tool functions based on messages in prompts. By providing the agent with functions that have meaningful names and well-documented parameters, the agent can "figure out" when and how to call the function all by itself!

By using one of the available custom tool options (or any combination of them), you can create powerful, flexible, and intelligent agents with Foundry Agent Service. These integrations enable seamless interaction with external systems, real-time processing, and scalable workflows, making it easier to build custom solutions tailored to your needs.

Summary
Completed
100 XP
2 minutes
In this module, we covered the benefits of integrating custom tools into Foundry Agent Service to boost productivity and provide tailored business solutions. By providing custom tools to our agent, we can optimize processes to meet specific needs, resulting in better responses from your agent.

The techniques learned in this module enable businesses to generate marketing materials, improve communications, and analyze market trends more effectively, all through custom tools. The integration of various tool options in the AI Agent Service, from Azure Functions to OpenAPI specifications, allows for the creation of intelligent, event-driven applications that use well-established patterns already used in many businesses.

Introduction
Completed
100 XP
2 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
AI agents are capable of performing a wide range of tasks, but many tasks still require them to interact with tools outside the large language model. Agents may need to access APIs, databases, or internal services. Manually integrating and maintaining these tools can quickly become complex, especially as your system grows, or changes frequently.

Model Context Protocol (MCP) servers can help solve this problem by integrating with AI agents. Connecting an Azure AI Agent to a Model Context Protocol (MCP) server can provide your agent with a catalog of tools accessible on demand. This approach makes your AI solution more robust, scalable, and easier to maintain.

Suppose you're working for a retailer that specializes in cosmetics. Your team wants to build an AI assistant that can help manage inventory by checking product stock levels and recent sales trends. Using an MCP server, you can connect the assistant to a set of tools that can make inventory assessments and provide recommendations to the team.

In this module, you learn how to set up an MCP server and client, and connect tools to an Azure AI Agent dynamically. You also practice creating your own AI MCP tool solution with Microsoft Foundry Agent Service.

Understand MCP tool discovery
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
As AI agents become more capable, the range of tools and services they can access also grows. However, registering new tools, managing, updating, and integrating them can quickly become complex and time-consuming. Dynamic tool discovery helps solve this problem by enabling agents to find and use tools automatically at runtime.

Advantages of the Model Context Protocol for AI agents
The Model Context Protocol (MCP) provides several benefits that enhance the capabilities and flexibility of AI agents:

Dynamic Tool Discovery:
AI agents can automatically receive a list of available tools from a server, along with descriptions of their functions. Unlike traditional APIs, which often require manual coding for each integration and updates whenever the API changes, MCP enables an “integrate once” approach that improves adaptability and reduces maintenance.

Interoperability Across LLMs:
MCP works seamlessly with different large language models (LLMs), allowing developers to switch or evaluate core models for improved performance without reworking integrations.

Standardized Security:
MCP provides a consistent authentication method, simplifying secure access across multiple MCP servers. This eliminates the need to manage separate keys or authentication protocols for each API, making it easier to scale AI agent deployments.

What is dynamic tool discovery?
Dynamic tool discovery is a mechanism that allows an AI agent to discover available external tools without needing hardcoded knowledge of each one. Instead of manually adding or updating every tool your agent can use, the agent queries a centralized Model Context Protocol (MCP) server. This server acts as a live catalog, exposing tools that the agent can understand and call.

This approach means:

Tools can be added, updated, or removed centrally without modifying the agent code.
Agents can always use the latest version of a tool, improving accuracy and reliability.
The complexity of managing tools shifts away from the agent and into a dedicated service.
How does MCP enable dynamic tool discovery?
An MCP server hosts a set of functions that are exposed as tools using the @mcp.tool decorator. Tools are a primitive type in the MCP that enables servers to expose executable functionality to clients. A client can connect to the server and fetch these tools dynamically. The client then generates function wrappers that are added to the Azure AI Agent's tool definitions. This setup creates a flexible pipeline:

The MCP server hosts available tools.
The MCP client dynamically discovers the tools.
The Azure AI Agent uses the available tools to respond to user requests.
Why use dynamic tool discovery with MCP?
This approach provides several benefits:

Scalability: Easily add new tools or update existing ones without redeploying agents.
Modularity: Agents can remain simple, focusing on delegation rather than managing tool details.
Maintainability: Centralized tool management reduces duplication and errors.
Flexibility: Supports diverse tool types and complex workflows by aggregating capabilities.
Dynamic tool discovery is especially useful in environments where tools evolve rapidly or where many teams manage different APIs and services. Using tools allows AI agents to adapt to changing capabilities in real time, interact with external systems securely, and perform actions that go beyond language generation.

Integrate agent tools using an MCP server and client
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
To dynamically connect tools to your Azure AI Agent, you first need a functioning Model Context Protocol (MCP) setup. This includes both the MCP server, which hosts your tool catalog, and the MCP client, which fetches those tools and makes them usable by your agent.

What is the MCP Server?
The MCP server acts as a registry for tools your agent can use. You can initialize your MCP server using FastMCP("server-name"). The FastMCP class uses Python type hints and document strings to automatically generate tool definitions, making it easy to create and maintain MCP tools. These definitions are then served over HTTP when requested by the client. Because tool definitions live on the server, you can update or add new tools at any time, without having to modify or redeploy your agent.

What is the MCP Client?
A standard MCP client acts as a bridge between your MCP server and the Azure AI Agent Service. The client initializes an MCP client session and connects to the server. Afterwards, it performs three key tasks:

Discovers available tools from the MCP server using session.list_tools().
Generates Python function stubs that wrap the tools.
Registers those functions with your agent.
This allows the agent to call any tool listed in the MCP catalog as if it were a native function, all without hardcoded logic.

Register tools with an Azure AI Agent
When an MCP client session is initialized, the client can dynamically pull in tools from the MCP server. An MCP tool can be invoked using session.call_tool(tool_name, tool_args). The tools should each be wrapped in an async function so that the agent is able to invoke them. Finally, those functions are bundled together and become part of the agent's toolset and are available during runtime for any user request.

Overview of MCP agent tool integration

The MCP server hosts tool definitions decorated with @mcp.tool.
The MCP client initializes an MCP client connection to the server.
The MCP client fetches the available tool definitions with session.list_tools().
Each tool is wrapped in an async function that invokes session.call_tool
The tool functions are bundled into FunctionTool that makes them usable by the agent.
The FunctionTool is registered to the agent's toolset.
Now your agent is able to access and invoke your tools through natural language interaction. By setting up the MCP server and client, you create a clean separation between tool management and agent logic—enabling your system to adapt quickly as new tools become available.

Use Azure AI agents with MCP servers
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
You can enhance your Microsoft Foundry agent by connecting it to Model Context Protocol (MCP) servers. MCP servers provide tools and contextual data that your agent can use to perform tasks, extending its capabilities beyond built-in functions. Azure AI Agent Service includes support for remote MCP servers, allowing your agent to quickly connect to your server and access tools.

When you use the Microsoft Foundry Agent Service to connect to your MCP server, you don't need to manually create an MCP client session or add any function tools to your agent. Instead, you create an MCP tool object that connects to your MCP server. Then you add information about the MCP server to the agent thread when invoking a prompt. This also allows you to connect and use different tools from multiple servers depending on your needs.

Integrating remote MCP servers
To connect to an MCP server, you need:

A remote MCP server endpoint (for example, https://api.githubcopilot.com/mcp/).
A Microsoft Foundry agent configured to use the MCP tool.
You can connect to multiple MCP servers by adding them to your agent as separate tools. Each MCPTool can include the following parameters:

server_label: A unique identifier for the MCP server (e.g., GitHub).
server_url: The MCP server’s URL.
allowed_tools (optional): A list of specific tools the agent is allowed to access.
require_approval (optional): A boolean that determines whether tool invocations require human approval. If set to true, the agent will pause and wait for approval before invoking any tools on the MCP server.
The MCP tool also supports custom headers, which let you pass:

Authentication keys (API keys, OAuth tokens).
Other required headers for the MCP server.
Invoking tools
When using the Azure MCP Tool object, you don't need to wrap function tools or invoke session.call_tool. Instead, the tools are automatically invoked when necessary during an agent run. To automatically invoke MCP tools:

Create the MCPTool object with the server label and url.
Use update_headers to apply any headers required by the server.
Use the require_approval parameter to determine whether approval is required. Supported values are:
always: A developer needs to provide approval for every call. If you don't provide a value, this one is the default.
never: No approval is required.
Create an agent and add the MCPTool object to its tools list
Invoke a prompt on the agent, you should see the results of any invoked tools in the response.
If the model tries to invoke a tool in your MCP server with approval required, you get an mcp_approval_request in the agent response. This includes information about which tool is being invoked, and you can use this information to decide whether to approve the request. To approve, you send a follow-up message with the mcp_approval_response object, which includes an approval_request_id value and an approve boolean.

MCP integration is a key step toward creating richer, more context-aware AI agents. As the MCP ecosystem grows, you’ll have even more opportunities to bring specialized tools into your workflows and deliver smarter, more dynamic solutions.

Introduction
Completed
100 XP
2 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Your organization is adopting AI agents to automate tasks and boost productivity. But you discover a fundamental challenge: how do you scale agents beyond simple, predefined tasks?

The real power of AI agents emerges when they can access your organization's knowledge. This knowledge includes your policies, procedures, product documentation, support articles, and domain expertise built over years.

Traditional AI agents have significant limitations. They can't access your private data, they're constrained by knowledge cutoff dates, and they generate generic responses without your company's context. When they lack factual grounding, they often create incorrect information.

If you want to build knowledge-enabled agents, you face complex engineering challenges. You need to connect to data sources, implement chunking strategies, build vector databases, and manage access controls. Each team tackles these same problems repeatedly.

Foundry IQ is Microsoft's unified knowledge platform that transforms how your AI agents access organizational data. Instead of rebuilding custom Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) pipelines for every project, you get a shared knowledge management system. Multiple agents can access the same knowledge bases, and improvements to those knowledge bases benefit every connected agent immediately.

Understanding RAG for agents
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
To understand why Foundry IQ represents such a significant advancement, we need to first examine the fundamental challenges that simple AI agents face in enterprise environments and how Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) addresses these limitations.

Simple AI agent limitations
Simple AI agents face significant challenges in enterprise environments. These limitations prevent them from providing the accurate, contextual responses that organizations need for critical business operations:

Limitation	Impact	Example
Knowledge cutoff dates	No access to recent information	Can't help with newly released features or updated policies
Private data access	Generic responses only	Missing company procedures, support knowledge, product specs
Lack of context	Irrelevant advice	Ignores specific security requirements or approval workflows
Fabricated responses	Compliance and security risks	Confident-sounding but incorrect information
Scalability issues	Duplicated engineering effort	Every team rebuilds the same RAG infrastructure
These challenges create real barriers to AI adoption in enterprise settings, where accuracy and reliability are non-negotiable.

How RAG solves these problems
Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) transforms agents by connecting them to organizational knowledge sources in real-time. This architectural approach fundamentally changes how agents access and use information, moving from static training data to dynamic knowledge retrieval.

The RAG process works in three coordinated steps:

Retrieve: System searches knowledge bases for relevant content related to the query
Augment: Combines retrieved content with the user's question to provide factual context
Generate: Agent creates response using both training data and retrieved information
Through this process, RAG delivers three critical advantages for enterprise AI:

Real-time updates that keep agents current with policies and procedures without requiring retraining
Source transparency that shows users exactly which documents informed each response to build trust and enable verification
Factual grounding that anchors responses in actual organizational content to eliminate fabricated information and ensure compliance
While RAG solves the knowledge problem, building it requires significant technical expertise. This is where Microsoft Foundry IQ comes in. Foundry IQ provides a ready-made knowledge platform that eliminates the complexity of custom RAG implementations. Let's explore Foundry IQ in the next unit.

Explore Foundry IQ
Completed
100 XP
8 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
You now know how RAG solves the knowledge problem for AI agents. But here's the challenge: building a RAG system from scratch means configuring vector databases, implementing embedding pipelines, tuning retrieval algorithms, and maintaining search infrastructure. What if you need three different AI agents across your organization? You'd build three separate RAG systems.

There's a better approach.

What is Foundry IQ?
Foundry IQ is a managed knowledge platform for AI agents built on Azure AI Search. It provides the retrieval capabilities you learned about in RAG, but as a shared service that multiple agents can use.

Consider a typical scenario. Your organization has product documentation stored in SharePoint, customer policies in Azure Blob Storage, and training materials in OneLake. With traditional RAG, you'd index each data source separately for each agent. With Foundry IQ, you create knowledge bases once and connect any agent to them.

This matters because it shifts your focus from building infrastructure to designing agent experiences. You spend time improving what information your agents access, not how they access it.

How knowledge bases organize information
Knowledge bases in Foundry IQ organize information by business domain rather than technical storage location. This design reflects how people actually think about information.

Instead of agents searching "SharePoint Site A" or "Blob Container B," they search "Product Documentation" or "HR Policies." Each knowledge base brings together related information regardless of where it's stored.

For example, your Product Documentation knowledge base might include:

Technical specifications from SharePoint
API documentation from Azure Blob Storage
Usage analytics from OneLake
Support tickets from your existing search index
To agents, this appears as one unified knowledge source. To you, it means connecting data sources to knowledge bases rather than managing separate retrieval systems.

Connecting data sources
Foundry IQ connects to your existing storage through data source integrations. You point it at your SharePoint sites, Blob containers, or OneLake instances. Foundry IQ handles indexing, embedding generation, and search optimization automatically.

Here's what happens when you add a data source:

Discovery: Foundry IQ scans your storage location for documents
Processing: Documents are chunked and embedded for semantic search
Indexing: Content becomes searchable through the knowledge base
Monitoring: Changes to your documents trigger automatic reindexing
You configure this once per data source. Every agent connected to that knowledge base instantly benefits from updates.

Built-in retrieval intelligence
Remember the retrieval strategies you learned about in RAG? Foundry IQ implements these automatically. When an agent queries a knowledge base, the platform:

Analyzes the question to understand what information the agent needs. A question like "What's our return policy for damaged items?" requires different retrieval than "List all return policies."

Selects retrieval strategies based on the query. Simple factual questions use keyword search. Complex questions combine semantic search with query expansion.

Ranks results using relevance scoring. The most contextually appropriate information surfaces first, reducing the tokens needed for agent responses.

Provides citations so agents can reference source documents. This builds trust and lets users verify information.

This intelligence runs without custom code. You define what knowledge bases contain. Foundry IQ determines how to retrieve from them.

Connecting agents to knowledge
Let's see how simple it is to give an agent access to organizational knowledge. This example creates a support agent that can answer questions using product documentation:

Python
from azure.ai.projects import AIProjectClient
from azure.ai.projects.models import PromptAgentDefinition, MCPTool

project_client = AIProjectClient(endpoint=project_endpoint, credential=credential)

# Connect to the product documentation knowledge base
knowledge_tool = MCPTool(
    server_label="product-docs",
    server_url=f"{search_endpoint}/knowledgebases/product-documentation/mcp"
)

# Create an agent with knowledge access
agent = project_client.agents.create_version(
    agent_name="product-support-agent",
    definition=PromptAgentDefinition(
        model="gpt-4o-mini",
        instructions="Answer product questions using the knowledge base. Always cite your sources.",
        tools=[knowledge_tool]
    )
)
The agent now retrieves information from the knowledge base just like it would use any other tool. You don't write retrieval logic or manage search infrastructure.

The shared knowledge advantage
The real value of Foundry IQ emerges when you scale beyond one agent. Imagine your organization needs:

A support agent answering customer questions
An employee assistant helping with HR policies
A developer agent explaining API usage
With traditional RAG, you'd build and maintain three retrieval systems. With Foundry IQ, you create knowledge bases that multiple agents share:

The Product Documentation knowledge base serves both the support agent and developer agent
The HR Policies knowledge base serves only the employee assistant
Each agent accesses exactly the knowledge it needs
When you improve a knowledge base by adding data sources or refining content, every connected agent benefits immediately. This is how organizations build consistent, scalable AI agent systems.

Configure data sources for knowledge bases
Completed
100 XP
9 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Your knowledge base is only as good as the data it contains. Foundry IQ lets you connect to multiple data sources, enabling your AI agent to access the information it needs to answer questions accurately. You configure these sources when you set up your knowledge base, ensuring your agent has the right context for your specific use case.

Understanding which data source to use depends on where your data lives and how you need to access it. Foundry IQ supports six primary data source types:

Data Source	Access Type	Best For
Azure AI Search Index	Indexed	Enterprise search with custom pipelines
Azure Blob Storage	Direct	Document files in Azure Storage
Web	Real-time	Current, public information via Bing
SharePoint (Remote)	Real-time	Live SharePoint content with Microsoft 365 governance
SharePoint (Indexed)	Indexed	Advanced search on SharePoint with custom pipelines
OneLake	Direct	Unstructured data in Microsoft Fabric
With real-time sources, you get current information. With internal data sources like SharePoint or OneLake, you maintain security and governance while giving your agent access to proprietary knowledge.

Azure AI Search Index
Azure AI Search Index provides enterprise-scale search capabilities for your Foundry IQ knowledge base. This option is ideal when you already invested in Azure AI Search and want to use existing search indexes.

With this source, you connect directly to your Azure AI Search index, which can contain data from multiple origins that you've already processed and indexed. This becomes especially important when you need sophisticated search capabilities like semantic ranking, filters, or custom scoring profiles that Azure AI Search provides.

 Tip

Learn more about Azure AI Search and how to create and manage search indexes for your knowledge bases.

Your agent can query this index to retrieve relevant information based on user questions. Key benefits include:

Semantic ranking - Finds contextually relevant results, not just keyword matches
Custom scoring - Prioritizes results based on your business logic
Faceted navigation - Filters results by categories or attributes
Multi-language support - Handles content in different languages
Azure Blob Storage
Azure Blob Storage lets you retrieve documents and files directly from your blob containers. You select specific containers or blobs, and Foundry IQ processes the content to make it available to your agent.

This source works well when you store documents in Azure Blob Storage. Common file types include:

PDF documents
Microsoft Word files (.docx)
Text files (.txt)
Markdown files (.md)
HTML files
 Note

Unlike Azure AI Search, which requires you to build and maintain an index, Blob Storage provides a more direct path from your files to your knowledge base.

Building on this concept, you can organize your blobs into containers based on topics or access levels, making it easier to manage what information your agent can access. This organization helps maintain data governance while keeping your knowledge base current.

Web
Web access grounds your agent with real-time content from the internet via Bing. Instead of relying only on static, internal data, your agent can search for current information when answering questions.

This becomes especially important when users ask about:

Recent events or news
Current pricing or availability
Frequently changing information
Topics outside your internal knowledge base
 Important

With web grounding, you're relying on Bing's search results, which means less control over the specific sources your agent references. When accuracy and source verification are critical, consider using indexed, controlled data sources instead.

 Tip

You can combine web grounding with internal data sources, using web access as a supplementary source when internal knowledge doesn't provide an answer.

Microsoft SharePoint options
Foundry IQ provides two ways to connect to SharePoint, each with distinct advantages. The following table compares these approaches:

Feature	Remote	Indexed
Access method	Real-time queries	Preprocessed index
Response time	Depends on SharePoint	Faster
Maintenance	No index to maintain	Requires index updates
Advanced search	Limited	Full Azure AI Search capabilities
Data freshness	Always current	Depends on indexing schedule
Permission handling	Respects SharePoint permissions	Configured during indexing
SharePoint Remote
SharePoint Remote provides search capabilities with Microsoft 365 governance, retrieving content directly from SharePoint without preindexing. Your agent searches SharePoint sites and libraries in real-time when users ask questions.

Key benefits of remote access:

No index maintenance required
Always accesses current SharePoint content
Automatically respects existing SharePoint permissions
Simpler setup and configuration
 Tip

Use SharePoint Remote when you need the simplest path to SharePoint data and don't require advanced search features.

SharePoint Indexed
SharePoint Indexed takes a different approach by indexing SharePoint content into Azure AI Search for custom pipelines. Unlike remote access, which queries SharePoint in real-time, indexing processes your SharePoint content in advance.

This preprocessing means faster response times and more sophisticated search capabilities. With indexed content, you can:

Apply custom analyzers for specialized terminology
Build enrichment pipelines with AI services
Combine SharePoint data with other sources
Create specialized search experiences
 Note

Indexed SharePoint works best when you need advanced search features or when you're integrating SharePoint data with other sources in your Azure AI Search index.

Microsoft OneLake
Microsoft OneLake provides access to unstructured data stored in your Microsoft Fabric data lakehouse. You connect to OneLake to retrieve files and documents stored in your lakehouse, making this data available to your knowledge base.

 Tip

Learn more about Microsoft Fabric OneLake and how it serves as a unified data lake for your organization.

This option matters when your organization uses Microsoft Fabric for data analytics and storage. Common use cases include:

Business intelligence reports - Reference analytical findings in agent responses
Data documentation - Provide context about datasets and metrics
Analytical findings - Share insights from data science work
Research outputs - Make research accessible through conversational AI
With this connection, your agent can reference this information when answering business questions, providing data-driven responses grounded in your organization's analytical work.

Choose the right data source
Selecting the appropriate data source depends on several factors. Use this decision guide:

If your data is...	And you need...	Choose...
In SharePoint	Simple setup, always current	SharePoint Remote
In SharePoint	Advanced search, custom pipelines	SharePoint Indexed
Files in Azure	Direct file access	Azure Blob Storage
In Microsoft Fabric	Data lakehouse content	OneLake
Already indexed	Existing Azure AI Search investment	Azure AI Search Index
Public, current information	Real-time web content	Web

 Important

You can combine multiple sources in a single knowledge base. For example, use internal SharePoint data as the primary knowledge base while enabling web grounding for current events or supplementary information.

Configure retrieval with Foundry IQ
Completed
100 XP
8 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
You've built a knowledge base and optimized how content gets indexed. Now comes the critical step: configuring how agents retrieve and use that knowledge.

This is where many implementations fail. You can have perfectly indexed content with excellent semantic ranking, but if your agent doesn't know when or how to use the knowledge base, users get inconsistent results.

The retrieval behavior problem
Consider what happens without proper configuration. You ask your agent "What's our vacation policy?" Three different behaviors might occur:

Behavior	Example Response	Problem
Answers from training data	"Most companies offer 2-3 weeks of vacation annually"	Generic information, not your actual policy
Searches but doesn't cite	"You get 15 days of PTO annually"	Correct but unverifiable, no accountability
Searches, cites, and grounds	"You receive 15 days of paid time off annually【doc_id:1†Employee Handbook 2024】"	✓ This is what you want
Only the third behavior is acceptable for enterprise agents. The first provides wrong information. The second lacks accountability. You need agents that consistently retrieve, cite, and stay grounded in your knowledge base.

Controlling retrieval with instructions
Agent instructions determine retrieval behavior. Think of them as the contract between you and the agent about how it should use knowledge bases.

Here's a basic approach that produces inconsistent results:

Python
agent = project_client.agents.create_version(
    agent_name="hr-assistant",
    definition=PromptAgentDefinition(
        model="gpt-4o-mini",
        instructions="Answer HR questions using the knowledge base.",
        tools=[knowledge_tool]
    )
)
This instruction is too vague. "Using the knowledge base" doesn't specify when to use it or how to present results. The agent might search or might not. It might cite sources or might not.

Writing effective retrieval instructions
Effective instructions specify three critical behaviors:

When to retrieve: Tell the agent to always use the knowledge base, never rely on training data
How to cite: Specify the exact format for source attribution
What to do when unsure: Define fallback behavior when information isn't found
Here's how this looks in practice:

Python
retrieval_instructions = """You are a helpful HR assistant.

CRITICAL RULES:
- You must ALWAYS search the knowledge base before answering any question
- You must NEVER answer from your own knowledge or training data
- Every answer must include citations in this format: 【doc_id:search_id†source_name】
- If the knowledge base doesn't contain the answer, respond with "I don't have that information in our current documentation. Please contact HR directly at hr@company.com"

Your role is to provide accurate, verifiable information from company documentation."""

agent = project_client.agents.create_version(
    agent_name="hr-assistant",
    definition=PromptAgentDefinition(
        model="gpt-4o-mini",
        instructions=retrieval_instructions,
        tools=[knowledge_tool]
    )
)
These instructions create consistent behavior. The agent knows exactly when to search, how to format responses, and what to do when information isn't available.

Testing retrieval behavior
Instructions alone aren't enough. You need to verify that agents actually behave as configured. This requires systematic testing with different query types.

Setting up a test conversation
Create a conversation session and send test queries:

Python
openai_client = project_client.get_openai_client()
conversation = openai_client.conversations.create()

# Test query that should trigger retrieval
response = openai_client.responses.create(
    conversation=conversation.id,
    input="How many vacation days do I get?",
    extra_body={"agent": {"name": agent.name, "type": "agent_reference"}}
)

print(response.output_text)
What to test
Your test queries should cover different retrieval scenarios:

Query Type	Example Questions	Expected Behavior
Straightforward factual	"What is our vacation policy?"
"Where can I find the security guidelines?"	Direct retrieval with citations
Questions requiring synthesis	"What are the differences between our leave types?"
"How do I request time off?"	Multiple document retrieval, synthesized answer with multiple citations
Questions outside knowledge base	"What's the weather like today?"
"Tell me about machine learning"	Graceful fallback ("I don't have that information...")
Ambiguous questions	"What about benefits?"
"Tell me more about that"	Clarifying questions or focused search on most relevant topic
Evaluating response quality
Good responses demonstrate four characteristics:

Grounding - Information comes from knowledge base, not training data
Citation - Every factual claim includes source references
Relevance - Retrieved content actually answers the question
Completeness - All necessary information is provided, not just fragments
When you find responses that don't meet these criteria, adjust your instructions. Add more specific rules. Clarify edge cases. Iterate until behavior becomes consistent.

Retrieval strategies for different agent types
Different agent purposes require different retrieval approaches. A customer support agent needs different behavior than an internal research assistant.

Customer-facing support agents
These agents need high accuracy and must never provide uncertain information:

Python
support_instructions = """You provide customer support using our product documentation.

Rules:
- Search the knowledge base for every product question
- Cite documentation for all technical answers
- If documentation doesn't cover a question, say "Let me connect you with a specialist" rather than guessing
- Focus on official product information, not general knowledge"""
Internal research assistants
These agents can synthesize across documents and provide broader context:

Python
research_instructions = """You help employees research topics across company documentation.

Rules:
- Search all relevant knowledge bases for comprehensive answers
- Synthesize information from multiple sources when helpful
- Always cite all sources used
- Indicate confidence level when synthesizing across documents
- Suggest related topics that might be useful"""
Specialized domain experts
These agents focus deeply on specific knowledge domains:

Python
compliance_instructions = """You are a compliance documentation assistant.

Rules:
- Only answer questions about compliance policies and procedures
- Always cite the specific policy document and section
- If a question involves interpretation or legal advice, refer to the compliance team
- Keep answers strictly factual based on written policies
- Note the effective date of any policy you reference"""
The pattern is consistent: define the agent's scope, specify retrieval requirements, establish citation standards, and handle edge cases explicitly.

Moving from testing to production
Once your test queries produce consistent, high-quality results, you're ready to deploy. But production introduces new challenges.

Monitor actual usage patterns. Users ask questions differently than your test scenarios. Some questions hit edge cases you didn't anticipate. Others reveal gaps in your knowledge base content.

Track these patterns:

Citation frequency - Are agents consistently citing sources?
Fallback frequency - How often do agents say "I don't know"?
Query types - What categories of questions appear most often?
Retrieval accuracy - Do retrieved documents actually contain answers?
Use this data to refine instructions, improve knowledge base content, and adjust search configurations. Retrieval quality improves through iteration based on real-world usage.

The combination of clear instructions, systematic testing, and ongoing monitoring creates reliable knowledge retrieval that scales across your organization's agents.

