Understand AI agents and Microsoft Foundry Agent Service
Completed
100 XP
8 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
An AI agent is a software service that uses generative AI to understand and perform tasks on behalf of users or other programs. Unlike traditional applications that follow predetermined rules, AI agents can operate independently by understanding context, making decisions, and taking actions to achieve specific goals. These agents combine advanced AI models with specialized tools to create intelligent automation that adapts to various scenarios.

The evolution of generative AI enables agents to behave intelligently on our behalf, transforming how we integrate AI into business processes and applications. Understanding what AI agents are and how to use them is crucial for automating tasks, making informed decisions, and enhancing user experiences.

Why AI agents are useful
AI agents provide significant value across multiple dimensions:

Automation of routine tasks - AI agents handle repetitive and mundane activities, freeing human workers to focus on strategic and creative work. This leads to measurable increases in productivity and efficiency.

Enhanced decision-making - By processing vast amounts of data and providing insights, AI agents support better decision-making. They can analyze trends, predict outcomes, and offer recommendations based on real-time information. Unlike simple chat models that only generate text, AI agents use advanced algorithms and machine learning to analyze data and make informed decisions autonomously.

Scalability - AI agents scale operations without proportional increases in human resources. Organizations can grow their capabilities without significantly increasing operational costs.

24/7 availability - Like all software, AI agents operate continuously without breaks, ensuring tasks are completed promptly and services remain available around the clock.

Examples of AI agent use cases
AI agents have diverse applications across industries:

Personal productivity agents
Personal productivity agents assist with daily tasks like scheduling meetings, sending emails, and managing to-do lists. Microsoft 365 Copilot helps users draft documents, create presentations, and analyze data within the Microsoft Office suite.

Research agents
Research agents continuously monitor trends, gather data, and generate reports. Financial services use them to track stock performance, healthcare organizations stay updated with medical research, and marketing teams analyze consumer behavior.

Sales agents
Sales agents automate lead generation and qualification. They research potential leads, send personalized follow-up messages, and schedule sales calls. This automation lets sales teams focus on closing deals rather than administrative tasks.

Customer service agents
Customer service agents handle routine inquiries, provide information, and resolve common issues. Integrated into chatbots on websites or messaging platforms, they offer instant support. For example, Cineplex uses an AI agent to process refund requests, significantly reducing handling time and improving customer satisfaction.

Developer agents
Developer agents assist with software development tasks including code review, bug fixing, and repository management. They automatically update codebases, suggest improvements, and ensure coding standards are maintained. GitHub Copilot exemplifies this type of agent.

 Tip

To learn more about GitHub Copilot, explore the GitHub Copilot fundamentals learning path.

Security considerations for AI agents
As AI agents become more autonomous and integrated into enterprise systems, they introduce security considerations beyond traditional application threats. Because agents can access sensitive data, make decisions, and act independently, you must design with security in mind from the start.

Key security risks include:

Risk Area	Description	Example Impact
Data leakage and privacy exposure	Agents often access sensitive business or user data. Without proper controls, they can unintentionally expose confidential information.	An agent summarizing internal files accidentally includes private data in customer-facing responses.
Prompt injection and manipulation attacks	Malicious users craft inputs that override an agent's intended behavior, tricking it into revealing data or performing unauthorized actions.	Hidden instructions in a message cause the agent to leak system credentials.
Unauthorized access and privilege escalation	Weak authentication or access controls let agents, or bad actors controlling them, access systems they shouldn't.	An agent connected to a CRM tool performs admin-level actions like exporting or deleting records.
Data poisoning	Attackers corrupt training or contextual data, causing agents to make biased, incorrect, or unsafe decisions.	A poisoned dataset causes a customer support agent to recommend harmful content.
Supply chain vulnerabilities	Agents rely on external APIs, plugins, or model endpoints, expanding the attack surface.	A compromised third-party plugin injects malicious code into the agent's workflow.
Over-reliance on autonomous actions	Highly autonomous agents may execute unintended actions if not carefully constrained or validated.	An agent mistakenly sends payments or publishes unverified content.
Inadequate auditability and logging	Without detailed logging, it's difficult to trace actions or detect malicious behavior early.	Security teams can't identify data misuse due to missing activity logs.
Model inversion and output leakage	Attackers might exploit model outputs to infer sensitive data used during training or prompting.	Repeated queries extract private information from a fine-tuning dataset.
Mitigation strategies
To reduce these risks, adopt a security-by-design approach that includes:

Enforcing role-based access controls (RBAC) and least privilege permissions
Adding prompt filtering and validation layers to prevent injection attacks
Sandboxing or gating sensitive operations behind human-in-the-loop approvals
Maintaining comprehensive logging and traceability for all agent actions
Auditing third-party dependencies and integrations regularly
Continuously retraining and validating models to detect data drift or poisoning attempts
By embedding these practices early in development, you can deploy AI agents safely and confidently in real-world environments.

Microsoft Foundry Agent Service overview
Microsoft Foundry Agent Service is a fully managed service designed to empower developers to securely build, deploy, and scale high-quality AI agents without managing underlying compute and storage resources. The service allows you to create agents tailored to your needs through custom instructions and advanced tools.

Previously, creating agent-like experiences required significant coding effort using standard APIs. Microsoft Foundry Agent Service handles the complexity through a streamlined interface, enabling you to build agents via the Foundry portal or in your own applications with fewer than 50 lines of code.

Agent types
Microsoft Foundry supports two primary types of agents:

Declarative agents - Agents defined through configuration rather than code. Declarative agents come in two forms:

Prompt-based agents - A single agent configured with a model, instructions, tools, and prompts. This is the most common type and the focus of this module.
Workflow agents - Multi-agent orchestrations defined in YAML, enabling complex scenarios where multiple agents collaborate to complete tasks.
Hosted agents - Containerized agents that are created and deployed in code, then hosted by the Foundry platform. Hosted agents give you full control over agent logic and execution while the platform manages infrastructure.

Understanding these agent types helps you choose the right approach for your scenarios. This module focuses primarily on declarative prompt-based agents, which provide the most accessible path to getting started.

Key features of Microsoft Foundry Agent Service
The service offers several powerful capabilities:

Automatic tool calling - The service handles the entire tool-calling lifecycle, including running the model, invoking tools, and returning results. This eliminates complex integration code.

Securely managed data - Conversation states are securely managed through the Responses API, removing the need for manual state management.

Extensive tool catalog - A rich set of built-in and community tools extends agent capabilities beyond text generation, including code execution, file search, web search, and integrations with Azure services and external APIs.

Model selection - Choose from various AI models to match your performance and cost requirements.

Enterprise-grade security - The service ensures data privacy and compliance with secure data handling, keyless authentication, and built-in content safety filters.

Customizable storage solutions - Use platform-managed storage or bring your own Azure Blob storage for full visibility and control.

Observability and tracing - Built-in monitoring capabilities help you track agent behavior, debug issues, and optimize performance in production.

These features provide a streamlined and secure way to build and deploy AI agents compared to developing with the Inference API directly.

Explore development approaches
Completed
100 XP
7 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Microsoft Foundry Agent Service provides flexibility in how you develop agents, with options ranging from visual interfaces to code-centric workflows. Understanding the different development approaches helps you choose the right tools for your scenarios and team preferences.

Foundry portal development
The Foundry portal provides a web-based interface for creating and managing AI agents without writing code. This approach is ideal when you want to quickly prototype ideas, collaborate with non-technical stakeholders, or manage agents through a centralized interface.

When to use the Foundry portal
The portal excels in these scenarios:

Quick prototyping - Rapidly test agent concepts and configurations without setting up development environments
Visual configuration - Configure agents through intuitive forms and dropdowns rather than code
Centralized management - View and manage all agents across projects in one place
Team collaboration - Share agent configurations with stakeholders who prefer visual interfaces
Resource oversight - Monitor token usage, latency, and evaluation outcomes through dashboards
The Azure portal provides immediate access to agent creation without installing additional tools. You simply navigate to your Foundry project, select the Agents section, and start building.

Visual Studio Code development
The Microsoft Foundry extension for Visual Studio Code brings enterprise-grade AI capabilities directly into your development environment. This approach suits developers who prefer working in familiar code editors and want tight integration with their development workflows.

Key capabilities of the VS Code extension
The extension organizes its features into three main sections:

Resources - Browse and manage your Foundry project assets directly from VS Code, including:

Deployed models - View and manage model deployments
Declarative agents - View and configure prompt-based and workflow agents
Hosted agents - View and manage containerized, code-deployed agents
Connections - Manage connections to external services
Vector stores - Organize document collections for File Search
Tools - Access development and testing capabilities:

Model Catalog - Browse and deploy models from the catalog
Model Playground - Experiment with models directly
Agent Playgrounds - Test agents using remote or local playgrounds
Local Visualizer - Debug and visualize agent behavior locally
Deploy Hosted Agents - Deploy containerized agents to production
Help and Feedback - Access documentation and support resources.

The extension also provides a visual Agent Designer for configuring agent properties, integrated code generation for application integration, and direct YAML configuration editing for precise control.

Screenshot of the Microsoft Foundry VS Code extension interface showing the Resources, Tools, and Help and Feedback sections.

When to use Visual Studio Code
The VS Code extension is ideal for:

Developer-centric workflows - Build agents alongside your application code in a single environment
Version control integration - Track agent configurations in Git alongside your codebase
Rapid iteration - Make quick changes and test immediately without switching tools
Code-first development - Edit YAML configurations directly for precise control
Local development - Work on agent designs offline before deploying to Azure
The extension installs directly from the Visual Studio Code Marketplace and connects to your existing Foundry projects. Detailed installation and setup steps are covered in the next unit.

Typical development workflow
Regardless of your chosen approach, agent development follows a consistent pattern:

Connect to your Microsoft Foundry project
Create an AI agent in the Foundry portal with a descriptive name and purpose
Configure agent instructions defining its behavior and capabilities (in the portal or VS Code)
Add tools to extend what the agent can do
Test the agent using integrated playgrounds
Iterate on the design based on test results
Deploy the agent to production
Integrate the agent into your applications
The Foundry portal and VS Code extension both support this workflow, differing primarily in interface style rather than capabilities.

Required Azure resources
Both development approaches require the same underlying Azure resources. To develop agents with Microsoft Foundry Agent Service, you need:

Microsoft Foundry project - Organizes your agents, models, and related assets in one place
Model deployments - Deployed AI models (such as GPT-4.1 or Claude Sonnet 4.6) that power your agents
When you create a Microsoft Foundry project, the necessary infrastructure is provisioned automatically. As you add capabilities to your agents, such as File Search or custom tools, the service seamlessly integrates any required supporting services behind the scenes. If you choose to extend the capabilities of your agent even further, for example with Foundry IQ, you may need to deploy some additional Azure services.

Optional Azure services
Depending on your agent's capabilities, you might integrate additional Azure services:

Azure AI Search - For advanced knowledge retrieval when using Foundry IQ or File Search tools
Azure Storage - For storing and managing files that agents can access
Azure Key Vault - For securely managing secrets and credentials
Azure Functions - For custom tool implementations and business logic
These services integrate with your Foundry project as needed, but aren't required to get started building agents.

Choosing your development approach
Both the Foundry portal and Visual Studio Code extension provide complete agent development capabilities. Your choice depends on your workflow preferences, team composition, and integration requirements:

Choose the Foundry portal when you want visual configuration, centralized management, or quick prototyping without local development setup.

Choose Visual Studio Code when you prefer developer-centric workflows, need tight integration with application code, or want version-controlled configuration files.

Many teams use both approaches — the portal for initial exploration and stakeholder reviews, and VS Code for detailed development and production deployments. The flexibility to switch between approaches based on your immediate needs is a key strength of Microsoft Foundry Agent Service.

Build your first agent in Microsoft Foundry
Completed
100 XP
8 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Building your first AI agent in the Foundry portal provides an accessible entry point to agent development. The portal's visual interface guides you through configuration without requiring code, making it easy to understand agent concepts while creating functional automation.

Creating an agent in the Foundry portal
The Foundry portal streamlines agent creation through an intuitive interface:

Navigate to Microsoft Foundry at https://ai.azure.com and sign in with your Azure credentials
Select your project from the list of available projects, or create a new one
Select Build > Agents in the left navigation menu
Select Create to start building a new agent
Enter agent details:
Name: Provide a descriptive name for your agent
Description: Add a clear description of the agent's purpose
Model: Select a deployed model from the dropdown, or deploy a new model
The portal creates your agent and opens the configuration interface where you can refine its behavior and capabilities.

Configuring agent instructions and properties
Agent instructions are the foundation of agent behavior. In the Instructions field, you define how your agent understands its role, responds to users, and handles various scenarios. Clear, specific instructions lead to consistent, reliable agent behavior. You'll configure instructions in more detail when working in Visual Studio Code later in this module.

Beyond instructions, the portal lets you configure model parameters such as Temperature (which controls response randomness) and Top P (which controls response diversity). These configuration options are explored further in the Visual Studio Code configuration unit.

Testing your agent in the portal
The Foundry portal includes an integrated playground for testing your agent before deployment. This testing environment lets you validate instructions, try different scenarios, and refine behavior based on results.

To test your agent, select the Playground tab and start a conversation. The playground maintains conversation history during your session, allowing you to test multi-turn interactions and verify the agent maintains context appropriately.

Adding basic tools
Before deployment, you can enhance your agent with tools from the tool catalog in the Tools section of the agent configuration (also accessible via Build > Tools in the portal). The catalog organizes tools into three categories:

Configured - Built-in tools ready to use immediately, such as Code Interpreter and File Search
Catalog - Additional tools you can add, including Bing Web Search, Azure AI Search, SharePoint, and more
Custom - Your own tools added through OpenAPI specifications or MCP servers
Tool capabilities and configuration are explored in detail in the Extend agent capabilities unit later in this module.

Deploying your agent
Once you're satisfied with your agent's behavior in testing, you can deploy it for production use. The portal provides clear deployment status indicators and generates the connection information needed to integrate the agent into your applications. After deployment, you can access the agent through the Microsoft Foundry SDK or REST APIs.

Building agents in the Foundry portal provides an accessible, visual approach to agent development. The interface guides you through configuration while offering powerful capabilities for creating sophisticated automation.

Set up Visual Studio Code for agent development
Completed
100 XP
7 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Setting up Visual Studio Code for AI agent development brings enterprise-grade capabilities directly into your familiar development environment. The Microsoft Foundry extension transforms VS Code into a comprehensive platform for building, testing, and deploying agents without leaving your editor.

Understanding the Microsoft Foundry extension
The Microsoft Foundry for Visual Studio Code extension provides direct access to Microsoft Foundry Agent Service capabilities. This extension creates an integrated experience for agent development that combines visual design tools with code-based configuration.

The extension organizes its features into three sections: Resources (for managing deployed models, declarative agents, hosted agents, connections, and vector stores), Tools (for accessing the model catalog, playgrounds, and deployment features), and Help and Feedback.

Screenshot of the Microsoft Foundry VS Code extension interface showing the Resources, Tools, and Help and Feedback sections.

Installing and configuring the extension
Setting up the Microsoft Foundry extension takes just a few minutes and requires minimal configuration.

Installation steps
Open Visual Studio Code on your machine
Select Extensions from the left pane, or press Ctrl+Shift+X (Windows/Linux) or Cmd+Shift+X (Mac)
Search for Foundry in the marketplace search box
Select the Microsoft Foundry extension from the results
Select Install to add the extension to VS Code
Wait for installation to complete (status appears in the Extensions panel)
After installation, the Microsoft Foundry icon appears in the VS Code activity bar on the left side of the window.

Connecting to Azure
Before working with agents, connect the extension to your Azure account and project:

Select the Azure icon in the VS Code activity bar
In the Azure Resources pane, sign in to your Azure account if prompted
Expand your Azure subscription in the resource tree
Expand the Foundry section to see your projects
Right-click your Microsoft Foundry project
Select Open in Foundry Extension
The extension now displays your project resources in the Microsoft Foundry panel, including existing agents, model deployments, connections, and vector stores.

Preparing for agent development
Before working with agents in VS Code, ensure you have the necessary resources deployed.

Deploying a model
Agents require deployed AI models to function. If you don't have a model deployment yet:

In the Microsoft Foundry extension, navigate to the Resources section
Expand the Model deployments subsection
Select the + (plus) icon to create a new deployment
Choose a model (such as GPT-4o or GPT-4) from the available options
Configure deployment settings:
Deployment name: Enter a descriptive name you'll use when configuring agents
Model version: Select the specific model version
Capacity settings: Configure throughput based on your needs
Select Deploy and wait for deployment to complete
The deployed model becomes available in dropdown menus when you configure agents.

Working with agents in VS Code
Agents are often created in the Foundry portal (as described in the previous unit) and then managed and configured in VS Code through the extension. Once you've created an agent in the portal, it appears automatically in the extension's Resources section.

Changes to agents in VS Code can be saved directly to Foundry, so you can work with your agent across platforms.

Managing multiple agents
As your projects grow, you'll likely manage multiple agents with different purposes. The Microsoft Foundry extension makes this straightforward:

Browse agents in the Resources view organized by project
Switch between agents by selecting them from the list
Compare configurations by opening multiple YAML files side by side
Duplicate agents to create variations without starting from scratch
Archive unused agents to keep your workspace organized
The extension maintains a clear view of all your agents, making it easy to navigate between different automation projects.

Setting up Visual Studio Code for agent development provides a powerful, integrated environment that accelerates the entire development lifecycle. With the Microsoft Foundry extension, you gain enterprise-grade agent development capabilities without leaving your familiar code editor, enabling rapid iteration and seamless deployment of intelligent automation.

Configure and manage agents in Visual Studio Code
Completed
100 XP
9 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Once you have a declarative agent (created in the Foundry portal or through the SDK), the real work begins — configuring its behavior, instructions, and properties to match your requirements. The Microsoft Foundry VS Code extension provides comprehensive configuration options through both the visual Agent Designer and direct YAML file editing, giving you flexibility in how you work.

 Note

The configuration workflow described in this unit applies to declarative prompt-based agents. Hosted agents are configured through code, and workflow agents use a different YAML schema for multi-agent orchestration.

Configuring agent properties
The Agent Designer provides an intuitive interface for setting up your agent's core properties. These settings define fundamental aspects of how your agent behaves and performs.

Essential configuration options
In the Agent Designer, you configure several key properties:

Agent name - Enter a descriptive name that clearly identifies your agent's purpose. This name appears in lists, logs, and when other developers work with your agents.

Model selection - Choose your model deployment from the dropdown. This selection determines which AI model powers your agent's responses. The dropdown shows only models you've already deployed in your project.

Description - Add a clear, concise description of what your agent does. Good descriptions help team members understand the agent's purpose without reading its instructions or code.

System instructions - Define the agent's behavior, personality, and response style. This is where you shape how your agent understands its role and interacts with users.

Agent ID - Automatically generated by the extension when you create the agent. This unique identifier is used when calling your agent through APIs.

Model configuration options
Beyond selecting a model, you can fine-tune its behavior through additional parameters:

Temperature - Controls response creativity and randomness. Lower values (0.1-0.3) produce consistent, focused outputs. Higher values (0.7-1.0) generate more creative, varied responses. For business agents handling structured tasks, values between 0.3 and 0.7 typically work well.

Top P - Controls diversity by limiting vocabulary choices during generation. Most scenarios work well with the default value of 1.0, but you can lower it for more constrained, predictable outputs.

These settings appear in both the Designer interface and the YAML file, remaining synchronized across both views.

Understanding the agent YAML structure
The YAML file contains all your declarative agent's configuration in a structured, readable format. Understanding this structure helps you make precise changes and work efficiently when the visual interface isn't the best fit.

Complete YAML example
Here's a fully configured agent YAML file:

YAML
# yaml-language-server: $schema=https://aka.ms/ai-foundry-vsc/agent/1.0.0
version: 1.0.0
name: healthcare-assistant
description: Assists healthcare staff with patient appointment scheduling and information retrieval
id: 'agent-abc123xyz'
metadata:
  authors:
    - developer-name
  tags:
    - healthcare
    - customer-service
    - scheduling
model:
  id: 'gpt-4.1'
  options:
    temperature: 0.5
    top_p: 1
instructions: |
  You're a healthcare assistant helping staff schedule patient appointments and retrieve information.

  Your responsibilities:
  - Help staff find available appointment slots
  - Answer questions about patient scheduling policies
  - Provide information about different appointment types
  - Assist with rescheduling and cancellations

  Important guidelines:
  - Never access or share patient medical information
  - Always verify appointment details before confirming
  - Be professional but friendly in all interactions
  - If you're unsure about policies, advise staff to check with management
tools: []
The YAML structure divides naturally into sections: metadata, model configuration, instructions, and tools. This organization makes it easy to locate and modify specific settings.

Benefits of YAML configuration
Direct YAML editing provides several advantages:

Version control - Track changes in Git alongside your application code
Bulk updates - Make multiple changes simultaneously with confidence
Templates - Create reusable agent templates for consistent configurations
Code review - Include agent configurations in your standard code review processes
Automation - Build scripts that generate or modify agent configurations programmatically
The extension validates YAML syntax in real-time, highlighting errors and providing suggestions as you type.

Best practices for agent configuration
As you build more complex agents, these practices help maintain quality and reliability:

Version control your YAML files - Commit agent configurations to Git alongside your application code. This enables rollback, code review, and change tracking.

Use descriptive names and tags - Clear naming and tagging make it easy to find and identify agents as your collection grows.

Document complex instructions - Include comments in your YAML files explaining why you chose specific instruction patterns or configurations.

Test after every change - Use the integrated playground to verify behavior after modifying configuration. Small changes can have unexpected effects.

Start simple, then iterate - Begin with basic instructions and add complexity based on testing results. Overly complex initial instructions are harder to debug.

Keep instructions focused - Each agent should have a clear, specific purpose. Agents trying to do too many things perform inconsistently.

Configuring agents in Visual Studio Code provides powerful capabilities for creating sophisticated automation. The combination of visual design tools and direct YAML editing enables rapid development while maintaining the precision needed for production deployments.

Extend agent capabilities with tools
Completed
100 XP
9 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
One of the most powerful features of AI agents is their ability to use tools that extend their capabilities beyond text generation. Tools enable agents to perform actions, access data, and integrate with external systems. Microsoft Foundry provides built-in tools and supports custom integrations, transforming agents from simple chat interfaces into sophisticated automation systems.

Understanding agent tools
Tools are programmatic functions that agents can invoke to complete tasks. When an agent determines that a tool is needed to respond to a user request, it automatically calls the appropriate tool, processes the results, and incorporates them into its response. This capability enables agents to work with real-time data, execute code, search knowledge bases, and interact with external services.

The tool-calling lifecycle happens automatically:

User sends a message to the agent
Agent analyzes the request and determines which tools (if any) are needed
Agent invokes the appropriate tools with relevant parameters
Tools execute and return results
Agent incorporates results into a natural language response
Response is returned to the user
This seamless integration means you can add powerful capabilities to agents without writing complex orchestration code.

Built-in tools overview
Microsoft Foundry provides a tool catalog that organizes available tools into three categories: Configured (ready-to-use built-in tools), Catalog (additional tools you can add from a registry including MCP servers), and Custom (your own tools via OpenAPI specifications or custom implementations). You can access the tool catalog through Build > Tools in the portal or through the VS Code extension.

The following are some of the most commonly used tools.

Code Interpreter
Code Interpreter enables agents to write and execute Python code in a secure, sandboxed environment. Use it for mathematical calculations, data analysis, chart generation, file processing, and complex problem-solving. For example, if a user asks an agent to "calculate the compound interest on a $10,000 investment at 5% annual rate over 10 years," the agent writes and executes Python code to compute the exact result.

File Search
File Search provides retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) by allowing agents to search through documents you've uploaded. The tool indexes your documents in a vector store and retrieves relevant information when needed, grounding agent responses in your specific knowledge base.

File Search supports PDF, Word (.docx), plain text (.txt), Markdown (.md), and other formats. When you add File Search to an agent, you create or select a vector store, upload documents, and the system automatically indexes them for semantic search.

Bing Web Search
Bing Web Search connects your agent to real-time internet information, enabling access to current events, trending topics, and information beyond training data. It includes automatic citation generation, so agents can reference their sources.

Azure AI Search
Azure AI Search provides advanced knowledge retrieval from your existing search indexes. Unlike File Search (which works with documents uploaded directly to the agent), Azure AI Search connects to enterprise-scale indexed data sources for structured and unstructured search scenarios.

OpenAPI tools
OpenAPI tools allow agents to interact with external APIs defined by OpenAPI 3.0 specifications, connecting your agents to web services and enterprise systems. You provide the specification, and Microsoft Foundry handles parameter mapping and response parsing.

Additional built-in tools
The tool catalog includes many more tools for specialized scenarios:

Tool	Description
Browser Automation	Interact with web pages, fill forms, and extract content
Computer Use	Interact with desktop applications
Image Generation	Create images based on text descriptions
SharePoint	Access SharePoint content and document libraries
Microsoft Fabric	Connect to Fabric data agents for data analytics
Deep Research	Perform in-depth research across multiple sources
Agent-to-Agent	Delegate tasks to other agents
Custom Code Interpreter	Customizable code execution for specialized environments
The tool catalog continues to expand. Check the Foundry portal for the latest available tools.

Adding tools in Visual Studio Code
The Microsoft Foundry extension provides an intuitive interface for adding and configuring tools. You can add tools through either the visual designer or by editing the YAML file directly.

Using the visual designer
To add tools through the Agent Designer:

Open your agent in the Agent Designer
Navigate to the Tools section in the configuration panel
Select Add Tool or the + icon
Browse the available tools in the tool library
Select the tool you want to add
Configure tool-specific settings if required
Save your changes
Screenshot of the tool catalog interface in the Microsoft Foundry VS Code extension.

When you add certain tools, the extension prompts you to configure related assets. For example, adding File Search lets you create or select a vector store for document indexing.

Adding tools through YAML
You can also add tools by editing the agent YAML file directly. This approach works well when you know exactly which tools you need or want to apply changes from templates.

Here's an example YAML configuration with multiple tools:

YAML
version: 1.0.0
name: research-assistant
description: Helps with research tasks using code analysis and web search
model:
  id: 'gpt-4o-deployment'
instructions: |
  You're a research assistant helping users gather and analyze information.
  Use Code Interpreter for data analysis and Bing Search for current information.
tools:
  - type: code_interpreter
  - type: bing_grounding
    bing_grounding:
      connection_id: "your-connection-id"
  - type: file_search
    file_search:
      vector_store_ids:
        - "vectorstore-123"
The tools array lists each enabled tool with its configuration. Some tools require additional parameters like connection IDs or vector store references.

Model Context Protocol (MCP) servers
Model Context Protocol (MCP) provides a standardized way to add custom tools to agents. MCP servers are available through the Catalog section of the tool catalog and offer reusable tool interfaces that work consistently across different agent implementations.

Types of MCP servers
The Foundry tool catalog supports three types of MCP servers:

Remote MCP servers - Hosted externally and accessed over the network. These are the most common type for production scenarios.
Local MCP servers - Run on your local machine during development. Useful for testing custom tools before deploying.
Custom MCP servers - Your own MCP server implementations tailored to specific needs.
Benefits of MCP servers
MCP servers provide several advantages:

Standardized protocol - Consistent tool communication patterns make integration predictable and reliable.

Reusable components - Build tools once and use them across multiple agents and projects.

Community-driven tools - Access tools built by the community through MCP registries, expanding capabilities without custom development.

Simplified integration - Consistent interfaces reduce integration complexity and maintenance burden.

Using MCP servers in VS Code
The Microsoft Foundry extension supports MCP server integration:

Browse available MCP servers through the extension's tool registry
Add MCP servers to your agent configuration
Configure server-specific settings and parameters
Test MCP server functionality in the integrated playground
Deploy agents with MCP server integrations to production
MCP servers extend your agent's capabilities with specialized functions while maintaining a consistent development experience.

Tool configuration best practices
Effective tool management ensures reliable agent performance:

Start with built-in tools before building custom solutions. Built-in tools are tested, maintained, and optimized for the platform.
Match tools to requirements - List what your agent needs to do and select tools accordingly. Don't add tools without clear purposes, as each tool adds latency.
Provide clear instructions - Tell your agent when and how to use each tool (for example, "Use Code Interpreter for any mathematical calculations") and when not to use them.
Keep knowledge bases current - When using File Search, update documents regularly. Outdated information leads to incorrect responses.
Test tool behavior thoroughly using the integrated playground. Send messages that should trigger tool usage, verify correct invocation, and test error scenarios.
Agents can use multiple tools together to handle complex scenarios. For example, a research agent might use Bing Web Search to gather current information, Code Interpreter to analyze data, and File Search to reference internal documentation — all orchestrated automatically based on the user's request.

Extending agent capabilities with tools transforms simple chat interfaces into powerful automation systems. By combining built-in tools with custom integrations and MCP servers, you can create agents that seamlessly interact with your data, systems, and services while maintaining enterprise-grade security and reliability.

More in-depth discussion on both tools and MCP servers can be found later modules.

Test, deploy, and integrate agents
Completed
100 XP
9 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Testing, deploying, and publishing agents are critical steps in moving from development to production. Microsoft Foundry provides comprehensive capabilities for validating agent behavior, deploying to your Foundry project, and publishing agents as callable endpoints that external consumers and applications can use.

Testing strategies for agents
Thorough testing ensures your agents behave reliably across diverse scenarios before reaching users. Both the Foundry portal and Visual Studio Code extension provide playgrounds for interactive testing.

Using the playground effectively:

Happy path testing - Verify the agent handles common, expected requests correctly.
Edge case testing - Try ambiguous inputs, incomplete information, and unusual requests to reveal how agents handle uncertainty.
Boundary testing - Confirm the agent respects boundaries defined in its instructions by testing out-of-scope requests.
Multi-turn conversation testing - Verify the agent maintains context across multiple exchanges and builds on previous responses.
Tool invocation testing - Verify agents call the right tools at the right times and incorporate results correctly.
Record test results to track improvements and catch regressions.

Deploying agents to your project
Microsoft Foundry supports deploying agents from the portal or Visual Studio Code. Deploying saves your agent configuration to your Foundry project so you can test and iterate.

Deploying from the Foundry portal
Navigate to your agent in the Foundry portal
Verify configuration and test results are satisfactory
Select Save from the agent's page
Confirm version and deployment settings
Deploying from Visual Studio Code
Open your agent in the AI Toolkit
Select Save to Foundry to push configuration changes
For hosted agents, open the +Build menu in the developer tools and select Deploy to Microsoft Foundry
Select your container configuration and confirm
Both approaches keep your agent within your project workspace where team members can access and test it.

Publishing agents to an endpoint
Publishing moves an agent from your project workspace into a managed Azure resource called an Agent Application. This step is what makes your agent externally callable through a stable endpoint.

What publishing creates
When you publish an agent version, Foundry creates:

Agent Application - An Azure resource with its own invocation URL, authentication policy, and Entra agent identity.
Deployment - A running instance of a specific agent version inside the application, with start/stop lifecycle management.
The key difference between deploying and publishing is scope. Deploying keeps the agent within your project. Publishing creates a dedicated endpoint that external consumers can call without needing access to your Foundry project.

Publishing from the Foundry portal
In the portal, select the agent version you want to publish
Select Publish to create the Agent Application and deployment
Publishing from Visual Studio Code
Open the Command Palette (Ctrl+Shift+P) and run Microsoft Foundry: Deploy Hosted Agent for hosted agents
Select the target workspace and container configuration
Confirm and deploy
After publishing, the agent appears in the Hosted Agents (Preview) section of the AI Toolkit extension tree view.

The Agent Application endpoint
Published agents expose a stable endpoint using the Responses API protocol:

https://<foundry-resource-name>.services.ai.azure.com/api/projects/<project-name>/applications/<app-name>/protocols/openai/responses

This URL stays the same even as you roll out new agent versions, so downstream consumers aren't disrupted by updates.

Authentication and identity
Agent Applications use Microsoft Entra ID for authentication. Callers must have the Azure AI User role on the Agent Application resource. API key authentication isn't supported for Agent Applications.

 Important

When you publish an agent, it receives its own dedicated Entra identity, separate from the project's shared identity. Permissions don't transfer automatically. You must reassign RBAC roles to the new agent identity for any resources the agent accesses. If you skip this step, tool calls that work during development fail with authorization errors once the agent is published.

Verifying the endpoint
After publishing, verify the endpoint works:

Get an access token:

Azure CLI
az account get-access-token --resource https://ai.azure.com
Call the Agent Application endpoint:

Bash
curl -X POST \
  "https://<foundry-resource-name>.services.ai.azure.com/api/projects/<project-name>/applications/<app-name>/protocols/openai/responses?api-version=2025-11-15-preview" \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer <access-token>" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"input":"Say hello"}'
If you receive 403 Forbidden, confirm the caller has the Azure AI User role on the Agent Application resource.

Updating published agents
To roll out a new agent version:

Make changes in your development environment and test thoroughly
In the Foundry portal, select Publish Updates from the Agent playground
The Agent Application routes 100% of traffic to the new version automatically
The endpoint URL remains unchanged, so existing integrations continue working.

Generating integration code
The Microsoft Foundry VS Code extension generates sample integration code to connect your application to a published agent:

Select your deployed agent in the My Resources view
Select View Code
Choose your folder
The extension generates code for authenticating, connecting, sending messages, and processing responses
Integration patterns
Common patterns for integrating published agents include:

Web applications - Send user messages to the Responses API endpoint and display responses in your UI. Store conversation history client-side for multi-turn interactions.
API-driven workflows - Call the agent endpoint from backend services triggered by events or schedules. Process responses programmatically to drive downstream actions.
Chatbot interfaces - Map user sessions to conversations. Handle real-time message exchange through the endpoint.
Background automation - Schedule agent calls for recurring tasks. Feed system data into agents and process outputs to update business systems.
Production considerations
Running agents in production requires attention to several operational areas:

Monitoring - Track response times, tool invocation success rates, error patterns, and token consumption using Application Insights integration.
Security - Use managed identities for authentication, apply least-privilege access, and define data retention policies.
Cost management - Monitor token usage, set response length limits, and implement rate limiting to prevent unexpected spikes.
Error handling - Implement retry logic with exponential backoff for transient failures. Handle rate limiting with backoff strategies. Validate inputs before sending to agents.
Conversation management - Agent Application endpoints currently support only the stateless Responses API. Store conversation history in your client for multi-turn experiences.

Summary
Completed
100 XP
2 minutes
You've learned how to develop AI agents using Microsoft Foundry Agent Service through both the Foundry portal and Visual Studio Code. These flexible development approaches enable you to create intelligent automation that handles complex tasks, accesses real-time data, and integrates seamlessly with your applications.

Throughout this module, you discovered what AI agents are and why they're valuable for automating workflows and enhancing decision-making. You explored the key features of Microsoft Foundry Agent Service, including the two primary agent types — declarative agents (configured through visual designers and YAML) and hosted agents (created and deployed through code). You learned to build agents using both the visual Foundry portal and the developer-focused VS Code extension, understanding when each approach fits best.

You configured agents with clear instructions that define their behavior and personality. You extended agent capabilities using the tool catalog, which provides built-in tools like Code Interpreter, File Search, Bing Web Search, Azure AI Search, and many more, transforming simple chat interfaces into sophisticated automation systems. You tested agents using integrated playgrounds, deployed them to production environments, and generated integration code to connect agents with your applications.

With these skills, you can create AI agents that automate routine tasks, provide intelligent assistance, and integrate with your existing systems. Whether you're building customer service automation, developer productivity tools, or specialized research assistants, Microsoft Foundry Agent Service provides the foundation for reliable, scalable AI solutions.

Introduction
Completed
100 XP
2 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Microsoft Foundry Agent Service offers a seamless way to build an agent without needing extensive AI or machine learning expertise. By using tools, you can provide your agent with functionality to execute actions on your behalf.

The AI Agent Service provides built-in tools for gathering knowledge and generating code, which provide your agent with some powerful functionality. However, sometimes your agent needs to be able to complete specific tasks or actions that an AI model would struggle to handle on its own. To accomplish these actions, you can provide your agent a custom tool based on your own code or a third-party service or API.

Imagine you're working in the retail industry, and your company is struggling with managing customer inquiries efficiently. The customer support team is overwhelmed with repetitive questions, leading to delays in response times and decreased customer satisfaction. By using Foundry Agent Service with custom tools, you can create a custom FAQ agent that handles common inquiries. This agent can be provided with a set of custom tools to look up customer orders, freeing up your support team to focus on more complex issues.

In this module, you'll learn how to utilize custom tools in Foundry Agent Service to enhance productivity, improve accuracy, and create tailored solutions for specific needs.

Why use custom tools
Completed
100 XP
3 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Microsoft Foundry Agent Service offers a powerful platform for integrating custom tools to enhance productivity and provide tailored solutions for specific business needs. By using these custom tools, businesses can achieve greater efficiency and effectiveness in their operations.

Why use custom tools?
Custom tools significantly enhance productivity by automating repetitive tasks and streamlining workflows that are specific to your use case. These tools improve accuracy by providing precise and consistent outputs, reducing the likelihood of human error. Additionally, custom tools offer tailored solutions that address specific business needs, enabling organizations to optimize their processes and achieve better outcomes.

Enhanced productivity: Automate repetitive tasks and streamline workflows.
Improved accuracy: Provide precise and consistent outputs, reducing human error.
Tailored solutions: Address specific business needs and optimize processes.
Adding tools makes custom functionality available for the agent to use, depending on how it decides to respond to the user prompt. For example, consider how a custom tool to retrieve weather data from an external meteorological service could be used by an agent.

Diagram showing an agent using a custom tool t call an external meteorological service.

The diagram shows the process of an agent choosing to use the custom tool:

A user asks an agent about the weather conditions in a ski resort.
The agent determines that it has access to a tool that can use an API to get meteorological information, and calls it.
The tool returns the weather report, and the agent informs the user.
Common scenarios for custom tools in agents
Custom tools within the Foundry Agent Service enable users to extend the capabilities of AI agents, tailoring them to meet specific business needs. Some example use cases that illustrate the versatility and impact of custom tools include:

Customer support automation
Scenario: A retail company integrates a custom tool that connects the Azure AI Agent to their customer relationship management (CRM) system.
Functionality: The AI agent can retrieve customer order histories, process refunds, and provide real-time updates on shipping statuses.
Outcome: Faster resolution of customer queries, reduced workload for support teams, and improved customer satisfaction.
Inventory management
Scenario: A manufacturing company develops a custom tool to link the AI agent with their inventory management system.
Functionality: The AI agent can check stock levels, predict restocking needs using historical data, and place orders with suppliers automatically.
Outcome: Streamlined inventory processes and optimized supply chain operations.
Healthcare appointment scheduling
Scenario: A healthcare provider integrates a custom scheduling tool with the AI agent.
Functionality: The AI agent can access patient records, suggest available appointment slots, and send reminders to patients.
Outcome: Reduced administrative burden, improved patient experience, and better resource utilization.
IT Helpdesk support
Scenario: An IT department develops a custom tool to integrate the AI agent with their ticketing and knowledge base systems.
Functionality: The AI agent can troubleshoot common technical issues, escalate complex problems, and track ticket statuses.
Outcome: Faster issue resolution, reduced downtime, and improved employee productivity.
E-learning and training
Scenario: An educational institution creates a custom tool to connect the AI agent with their learning management system (LMS).
Functionality: The AI agent can recommend courses, track student progress, and answer questions about course content.
Outcome: Enhanced learning experiences, increased student engagement, and streamlined administrative tasks.
These examples demonstrate how custom tools within the Foundry Agent Service can be used across industries to address unique challenges, drive efficiency, and deliver value.

Options for implementing custom tools
Completed
100 XP
6 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Microsoft Foundry Agent Service offers various custom tools that enhance the capabilities and efficiency of your AI agents. These tools allow for scalable interoperability with various applications, making it easier to integrate with existing infrastructure or web services.

Custom tool options available in Microsoft Foundry Agent Service
Foundry Agent Service provides several custom tool options, including OpenAPI specified tools, Azure Functions, and function calling. These tools enable seamless integration with external APIs, event-driven applications, and custom functions.

Custom function: Function calling allows you to describe the structure of custom functions to an agent and return the functions that need to be called along with their arguments. The agent can dynamically identify appropriate functions based on their definitions. This feature is useful for integrating custom logic and workflows, in a selection of programming languages, into your AI agents.
Azure Functions: Azure Functions enables you to create intelligent, event-driven applications with minimal overhead. They support triggers and bindings, which simplify how your AI Agents interact with external systems and services. Triggers determine when a function executes, while bindings facilitate streamlined connections to input or output data sources.
OpenAPI specification tools: These tools allow you to connect your Azure AI Agent to an external API using an OpenAPI 3.0 specification. This provides standardized, automated, and scalable API integrations that enhance the capabilities of your agent. OpenAPI specifications describe HTTP APIs, enabling people to understand how an API works, generate client code, create tests, and apply design standards.
Azure Logic Apps: This action provides low-code/no-code solutions to add workflows and connects apps, data, and services with the low-code Logic App.
This flexibility to integrate custom functionality in multiple ways enables a wide range of extensibility possibilities for your Foundry Agent Service agents.

How to integrate custom tools
Completed
100 XP
7 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Custom tools in an agent can be defined in a handful of ways, depending on what works best for your scenario. You may find that your company already has Azure Functions implemented for your agent to use, or a public OpenAPI specification gives your agent the functionality you're looking for.

Function Calling
Function calling allows agents to execute predefined functions dynamically based on user input. This feature is ideal for scenarios where agents need to perform specific tasks, such as retrieving data or processing user queries, and can be done in code from within the agent. Your function may call out to other APIs to get additional information or initiate a program.

Example: Defining and using a function
Start by defining a function that the agent can call. For instance, here's a fake snowfall tracking function:

Python
import json

def recent_snowfall(location: str) -> str:
    """
    Fetches recent snowfall totals for a given location.
    :param location: The city name.
    :return: Snowfall details as a JSON string.
    """
    mock_snow_data = {"Seattle": "0 inches", "Denver": "2 inches"}
    snow = mock_snow_data.get(location, "Data not available.")
    return json.dumps({"location": location, "snowfall": snow})
Register the function with your agent using the Azure AI SDK:

Python
# Define a function tool for the model to use
function_tool = FunctionTool(
    name="recent_snowfall",
    parameters={
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
            "location": {"type": "string", "description": "The city name to check snowfall for."},
        },
        "required": ["location"],
        "additionalProperties": False
    },
    description="Get recent snowfall totals for a given location.",
    strict=True,
)

# Add the function tool to a list of tools for the agent
tools: list[Tool] = [function_tool]

# Create your agent with the toolset
agent = project_client.agents.create_version(
    name="snowfall-agent",
    definition=PromptAgentDefinition(
        model="gpt-4.1",
        instructions="You are a weather assistant tracking snowfall. Use the provided functions to answer questions.",
        tools=tools,
    )
)
The agent can now call recent_snowfall dynamically when it determines that the prompt requires information that can be retrieved by the function.

Azure Functions
Azure Functions provides serverless computing capabilities for real-time processing. This integration is ideal for event-driven workflows, enabling agents to respond to triggers such as HTTP requests or queue messages.

Example: Using Azure Functions with a queue trigger
First, develop and deploy your Azure Function. In this example, imagine we have a function in our Azure subscription to fetch the snowfall for a given location.

When your Azure Function is in place, add it to the agent definition as an Azure Function tool:

Python
tool = AzureFunctionTool(
    azure_function=AzureFunctionDefinition(
        input_binding=AzureFunctionBinding(
            storage_queue=AzureFunctionStorageQueue(
                queue_name="STORAGE_INPUT_QUEUE_NAME",
                queue_service_endpoint="STORAGE_QUEUE_SERVICE_ENDPOINT",
            )
        ),
        output_binding=AzureFunctionBinding(
            storage_queue=AzureFunctionStorageQueue(
                queue_name="STORAGE_OUTPUT_QUEUE_NAME",
                queue_service_endpoint="STORAGE_QUEUE_SERVICE_ENDPOINT",
            )
        ),
        function=AzureFunctionDefinitionFunction(
            name="queue_trigger",
            description="Get weather for a given location",
            parameters={
                "type": "object",
                "properties": {"location": {"type": "string", "description": "location to determine weather for"}},
            },
        ),
    )
)

agent = project_client.agents.create_version(
    agent_name="MyAgent",
    definition=PromptAgentDefinition(
        model="gpt-4.1",
        instructions="You are a helpful weather assistant. Use the provided Azure Function to get weather information for a location when needed.",
        tools=[tool],
    ),
)
The agent can now send requests to the Azure Function via a storage queue and process the results.

OpenAPI Specification
OpenAPI defined tools allow agents to interact with external APIs using standardized specifications. This approach simplifies API integration and ensures compatibility with various services. The Foundry Agent Service uses OpenAPI 3.0 specified tools.

 Tip

Currently, three authentication types are supported with OpenAPI 3.0 tools: anonymous, API key, and managed identity.

Example: Using an OpenAPI specification
First, create a JSON file (in this example, called weather_openapi.json) describing the API.

JSON
{
  "openapi": "3.1.0",
  "info": {
    "title": "get weather data",
    "description": "Retrieves current weather data for a location based on wttr.in.",
    "version": "v1.0.0"
  },
  "servers": [
    {
      "url": "https://wttr.in"
    }
  ],
  "auth": [],
  "paths": {
    "/{location}": {
      "get": {
        "description": "Get weather information for a specific location",
        "operationId": "GetCurrentWeather",
        "parameters": [
          {
            "name": "location",
            "in": "path",
            "description": "City or location to retrieve the weather for",
            "required": true,
            "schema": {
              "type": "string"
            }
          },
          {
          "name": "format",
          "in": "query",
          "description": "Always use j1 value for this parameter",
          "required": true,
          "schema": {
            "type": "string",
            "default": "j1"
          }
        }
        ],
        "responses": {
          "200": {
            "description": "Successful response",
            "content": {
              "text/plain": {
                "schema": {
                  "type": "string"
                }
              }
            }
          },
          "404": {
            "description": "Location not found"
          }
        },
        "deprecated": false
      }
    }
  },
  "components": {
    "schemes": {}
  }
}
Then, register the OpenAPI tool in the agent definition:

Python
from azure.ai.projects.models import OpenApiTool, OpenApiAnonymousAuthDetails

with open(weather_asset_file_path, "r") as f:
      openapi_weather = cast(dict[str, Any], jsonref.loads(f.read()))

tool = OpenApiTool(
    openapi=OpenApiFunctionDefinition(
        name="get_weather",
        spec=openapi_weather,
        description="Retrieve weather information for a location.",
        auth=OpenApiAnonymousAuthDetails(),
    )
)

agent = project_client.agents.create_version(
    agent_name="openapi-agent",
    definition=PromptAgentDefinition(
        model="gpt-4.1",
        instructions="You are a weather assistant. Use the API to fetch weather data.",
        tools=[openapi_tool],
    ),
)
The agent can now use the OpenAPI tool to fetch weather data dynamically.

 Note

One of the concepts related to agents and custom tools that developers often have difficulty with is the declarative nature of the solution. You don't need to write code that explicitly calls your custom tool functions - the agent itself decides to call tool functions based on messages in prompts. By providing the agent with functions that have meaningful names and well-documented parameters, the agent can "figure out" when and how to call the function all by itself!

By using one of the available custom tool options (or any combination of them), you can create powerful, flexible, and intelligent agents with Foundry Agent Service. These integrations enable seamless interaction with external systems, real-time processing, and scalable workflows, making it easier to build custom solutions tailored to your needs.

Summary
Completed
100 XP
2 minutes
In this module, we covered the benefits of integrating custom tools into Foundry Agent Service to boost productivity and provide tailored business solutions. By providing custom tools to our agent, we can optimize processes to meet specific needs, resulting in better responses from your agent.

The techniques learned in this module enable businesses to generate marketing materials, improve communications, and analyze market trends more effectively, all through custom tools. The integration of various tool options in the AI Agent Service, from Azure Functions to OpenAPI specifications, allows for the creation of intelligent, event-driven applications that use well-established patterns already used in many businesses.

Introduction
Completed
100 XP
2 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
AI agents are capable of performing a wide range of tasks, but many tasks still require them to interact with tools outside the large language model. Agents may need to access APIs, databases, or internal services. Manually integrating and maintaining these tools can quickly become complex, especially as your system grows, or changes frequently.

Model Context Protocol (MCP) servers can help solve this problem by integrating with AI agents. Connecting an Azure AI Agent to a Model Context Protocol (MCP) server can provide your agent with a catalog of tools accessible on demand. This approach makes your AI solution more robust, scalable, and easier to maintain.

Suppose you're working for a retailer that specializes in cosmetics. Your team wants to build an AI assistant that can help manage inventory by checking product stock levels and recent sales trends. Using an MCP server, you can connect the assistant to a set of tools that can make inventory assessments and provide recommendations to the team.

In this module, you learn how to set up an MCP server and client, and connect tools to an Azure AI Agent dynamically. You also practice creating your own AI MCP tool solution with Microsoft Foundry Agent Service.

Understand MCP tool discovery
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
As AI agents become more capable, the range of tools and services they can access also grows. However, registering new tools, managing, updating, and integrating them can quickly become complex and time-consuming. Dynamic tool discovery helps solve this problem by enabling agents to find and use tools automatically at runtime.

Advantages of the Model Context Protocol for AI agents
The Model Context Protocol (MCP) provides several benefits that enhance the capabilities and flexibility of AI agents:

Dynamic Tool Discovery:
AI agents can automatically receive a list of available tools from a server, along with descriptions of their functions. Unlike traditional APIs, which often require manual coding for each integration and updates whenever the API changes, MCP enables an “integrate once” approach that improves adaptability and reduces maintenance.

Interoperability Across LLMs:
MCP works seamlessly with different large language models (LLMs), allowing developers to switch or evaluate core models for improved performance without reworking integrations.

Standardized Security:
MCP provides a consistent authentication method, simplifying secure access across multiple MCP servers. This eliminates the need to manage separate keys or authentication protocols for each API, making it easier to scale AI agent deployments.

What is dynamic tool discovery?
Dynamic tool discovery is a mechanism that allows an AI agent to discover available external tools without needing hardcoded knowledge of each one. Instead of manually adding or updating every tool your agent can use, the agent queries a centralized Model Context Protocol (MCP) server. This server acts as a live catalog, exposing tools that the agent can understand and call.

This approach means:

Tools can be added, updated, or removed centrally without modifying the agent code.
Agents can always use the latest version of a tool, improving accuracy and reliability.
The complexity of managing tools shifts away from the agent and into a dedicated service.
How does MCP enable dynamic tool discovery?
An MCP server hosts a set of functions that are exposed as tools using the @mcp.tool decorator. Tools are a primitive type in the MCP that enables servers to expose executable functionality to clients. A client can connect to the server and fetch these tools dynamically. The client then generates function wrappers that are added to the Azure AI Agent's tool definitions. This setup creates a flexible pipeline:

The MCP server hosts available tools.
The MCP client dynamically discovers the tools.
The Azure AI Agent uses the available tools to respond to user requests.
Why use dynamic tool discovery with MCP?
This approach provides several benefits:

Scalability: Easily add new tools or update existing ones without redeploying agents.
Modularity: Agents can remain simple, focusing on delegation rather than managing tool details.
Maintainability: Centralized tool management reduces duplication and errors.
Flexibility: Supports diverse tool types and complex workflows by aggregating capabilities.
Dynamic tool discovery is especially useful in environments where tools evolve rapidly or where many teams manage different APIs and services. Using tools allows AI agents to adapt to changing capabilities in real time, interact with external systems securely, and perform actions that go beyond language generation.

Integrate agent tools using an MCP server and client
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
To dynamically connect tools to your Azure AI Agent, you first need a functioning Model Context Protocol (MCP) setup. This includes both the MCP server, which hosts your tool catalog, and the MCP client, which fetches those tools and makes them usable by your agent.

What is the MCP Server?
The MCP server acts as a registry for tools your agent can use. You can initialize your MCP server using FastMCP("server-name"). The FastMCP class uses Python type hints and document strings to automatically generate tool definitions, making it easy to create and maintain MCP tools. These definitions are then served over HTTP when requested by the client. Because tool definitions live on the server, you can update or add new tools at any time, without having to modify or redeploy your agent.

What is the MCP Client?
A standard MCP client acts as a bridge between your MCP server and the Azure AI Agent Service. The client initializes an MCP client session and connects to the server. Afterwards, it performs three key tasks:

Discovers available tools from the MCP server using session.list_tools().
Generates Python function stubs that wrap the tools.
Registers those functions with your agent.
This allows the agent to call any tool listed in the MCP catalog as if it were a native function, all without hardcoded logic.

Register tools with an Azure AI Agent
When an MCP client session is initialized, the client can dynamically pull in tools from the MCP server. An MCP tool can be invoked using session.call_tool(tool_name, tool_args). The tools should each be wrapped in an async function so that the agent is able to invoke them. Finally, those functions are bundled together and become part of the agent's toolset and are available during runtime for any user request.

Overview of MCP agent tool integration

The MCP server hosts tool definitions decorated with @mcp.tool.
The MCP client initializes an MCP client connection to the server.
The MCP client fetches the available tool definitions with session.list_tools().
Each tool is wrapped in an async function that invokes session.call_tool
The tool functions are bundled into FunctionTool that makes them usable by the agent.
The FunctionTool is registered to the agent's toolset.
Now your agent is able to access and invoke your tools through natural language interaction. By setting up the MCP server and client, you create a clean separation between tool management and agent logic—enabling your system to adapt quickly as new tools become available.

Use Azure AI agents with MCP servers
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
You can enhance your Microsoft Foundry agent by connecting it to Model Context Protocol (MCP) servers. MCP servers provide tools and contextual data that your agent can use to perform tasks, extending its capabilities beyond built-in functions. Azure AI Agent Service includes support for remote MCP servers, allowing your agent to quickly connect to your server and access tools.

When you use the Microsoft Foundry Agent Service to connect to your MCP server, you don't need to manually create an MCP client session or add any function tools to your agent. Instead, you create an MCP tool object that connects to your MCP server. Then you add information about the MCP server to the agent thread when invoking a prompt. This also allows you to connect and use different tools from multiple servers depending on your needs.

Integrating remote MCP servers
To connect to an MCP server, you need:

A remote MCP server endpoint (for example, https://api.githubcopilot.com/mcp/).
A Microsoft Foundry agent configured to use the MCP tool.
You can connect to multiple MCP servers by adding them to your agent as separate tools. Each MCPTool can include the following parameters:

server_label: A unique identifier for the MCP server (e.g., GitHub).
server_url: The MCP server’s URL.
allowed_tools (optional): A list of specific tools the agent is allowed to access.
require_approval (optional): A boolean that determines whether tool invocations require human approval. If set to true, the agent will pause and wait for approval before invoking any tools on the MCP server.
The MCP tool also supports custom headers, which let you pass:

Authentication keys (API keys, OAuth tokens).
Other required headers for the MCP server.
Invoking tools
When using the Azure MCP Tool object, you don't need to wrap function tools or invoke session.call_tool. Instead, the tools are automatically invoked when necessary during an agent run. To automatically invoke MCP tools:

Create the MCPTool object with the server label and url.
Use update_headers to apply any headers required by the server.
Use the require_approval parameter to determine whether approval is required. Supported values are:
always: A developer needs to provide approval for every call. If you don't provide a value, this one is the default.
never: No approval is required.
Create an agent and add the MCPTool object to its tools list
Invoke a prompt on the agent, you should see the results of any invoked tools in the response.
If the model tries to invoke a tool in your MCP server with approval required, you get an mcp_approval_request in the agent response. This includes information about which tool is being invoked, and you can use this information to decide whether to approve the request. To approve, you send a follow-up message with the mcp_approval_response object, which includes an approval_request_id value and an approve boolean.

MCP integration is a key step toward creating richer, more context-aware AI agents. As the MCP ecosystem grows, you’ll have even more opportunities to bring specialized tools into your workflows and deliver smarter, more dynamic solutions.

Introduction
Completed
100 XP
2 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Your organization is adopting AI agents to automate tasks and boost productivity. But you discover a fundamental challenge: how do you scale agents beyond simple, predefined tasks?

The real power of AI agents emerges when they can access your organization's knowledge. This knowledge includes your policies, procedures, product documentation, support articles, and domain expertise built over years.

Traditional AI agents have significant limitations. They can't access your private data, they're constrained by knowledge cutoff dates, and they generate generic responses without your company's context. When they lack factual grounding, they often create incorrect information.

If you want to build knowledge-enabled agents, you face complex engineering challenges. You need to connect to data sources, implement chunking strategies, build vector databases, and manage access controls. Each team tackles these same problems repeatedly.

Foundry IQ is Microsoft's unified knowledge platform that transforms how your AI agents access organizational data. Instead of rebuilding custom Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) pipelines for every project, you get a shared knowledge management system. Multiple agents can access the same knowledge bases, and improvements to those knowledge bases benefit every connected agent immediately.

Understanding RAG for agents
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
To understand why Foundry IQ represents such a significant advancement, we need to first examine the fundamental challenges that simple AI agents face in enterprise environments and how Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) addresses these limitations.

Simple AI agent limitations
Simple AI agents face significant challenges in enterprise environments. These limitations prevent them from providing the accurate, contextual responses that organizations need for critical business operations:

Limitation	Impact	Example
Knowledge cutoff dates	No access to recent information	Can't help with newly released features or updated policies
Private data access	Generic responses only	Missing company procedures, support knowledge, product specs
Lack of context	Irrelevant advice	Ignores specific security requirements or approval workflows
Fabricated responses	Compliance and security risks	Confident-sounding but incorrect information
Scalability issues	Duplicated engineering effort	Every team rebuilds the same RAG infrastructure
These challenges create real barriers to AI adoption in enterprise settings, where accuracy and reliability are non-negotiable.

How RAG solves these problems
Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) transforms agents by connecting them to organizational knowledge sources in real-time. This architectural approach fundamentally changes how agents access and use information, moving from static training data to dynamic knowledge retrieval.

The RAG process works in three coordinated steps:

Retrieve: System searches knowledge bases for relevant content related to the query
Augment: Combines retrieved content with the user's question to provide factual context
Generate: Agent creates response using both training data and retrieved information
Through this process, RAG delivers three critical advantages for enterprise AI:

Real-time updates that keep agents current with policies and procedures without requiring retraining
Source transparency that shows users exactly which documents informed each response to build trust and enable verification
Factual grounding that anchors responses in actual organizational content to eliminate fabricated information and ensure compliance
While RAG solves the knowledge problem, building it requires significant technical expertise. This is where Microsoft Foundry IQ comes in. Foundry IQ provides a ready-made knowledge platform that eliminates the complexity of custom RAG implementations. Let's explore Foundry IQ in the next unit.

Explore Foundry IQ
Completed
100 XP
8 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
You now know how RAG solves the knowledge problem for AI agents. But here's the challenge: building a RAG system from scratch means configuring vector databases, implementing embedding pipelines, tuning retrieval algorithms, and maintaining search infrastructure. What if you need three different AI agents across your organization? You'd build three separate RAG systems.

There's a better approach.

What is Foundry IQ?
Foundry IQ is a managed knowledge platform for AI agents built on Azure AI Search. It provides the retrieval capabilities you learned about in RAG, but as a shared service that multiple agents can use.

Consider a typical scenario. Your organization has product documentation stored in SharePoint, customer policies in Azure Blob Storage, and training materials in OneLake. With traditional RAG, you'd index each data source separately for each agent. With Foundry IQ, you create knowledge bases once and connect any agent to them.

This matters because it shifts your focus from building infrastructure to designing agent experiences. You spend time improving what information your agents access, not how they access it.

How knowledge bases organize information
Knowledge bases in Foundry IQ organize information by business domain rather than technical storage location. This design reflects how people actually think about information.

Instead of agents searching "SharePoint Site A" or "Blob Container B," they search "Product Documentation" or "HR Policies." Each knowledge base brings together related information regardless of where it's stored.

For example, your Product Documentation knowledge base might include:

Technical specifications from SharePoint
API documentation from Azure Blob Storage
Usage analytics from OneLake
Support tickets from your existing search index
To agents, this appears as one unified knowledge source. To you, it means connecting data sources to knowledge bases rather than managing separate retrieval systems.

Connecting data sources
Foundry IQ connects to your existing storage through data source integrations. You point it at your SharePoint sites, Blob containers, or OneLake instances. Foundry IQ handles indexing, embedding generation, and search optimization automatically.

Here's what happens when you add a data source:

Discovery: Foundry IQ scans your storage location for documents
Processing: Documents are chunked and embedded for semantic search
Indexing: Content becomes searchable through the knowledge base
Monitoring: Changes to your documents trigger automatic reindexing
You configure this once per data source. Every agent connected to that knowledge base instantly benefits from updates.

Built-in retrieval intelligence
Remember the retrieval strategies you learned about in RAG? Foundry IQ implements these automatically. When an agent queries a knowledge base, the platform:

Analyzes the question to understand what information the agent needs. A question like "What's our return policy for damaged items?" requires different retrieval than "List all return policies."

Selects retrieval strategies based on the query. Simple factual questions use keyword search. Complex questions combine semantic search with query expansion.

Ranks results using relevance scoring. The most contextually appropriate information surfaces first, reducing the tokens needed for agent responses.

Provides citations so agents can reference source documents. This builds trust and lets users verify information.

This intelligence runs without custom code. You define what knowledge bases contain. Foundry IQ determines how to retrieve from them.

Connecting agents to knowledge
Let's see how simple it is to give an agent access to organizational knowledge. This example creates a support agent that can answer questions using product documentation:

Python
from azure.ai.projects import AIProjectClient
from azure.ai.projects.models import PromptAgentDefinition, MCPTool

project_client = AIProjectClient(endpoint=project_endpoint, credential=credential)

# Connect to the product documentation knowledge base
knowledge_tool = MCPTool(
    server_label="product-docs",
    server_url=f"{search_endpoint}/knowledgebases/product-documentation/mcp"
)

# Create an agent with knowledge access
agent = project_client.agents.create_version(
    agent_name="product-support-agent",
    definition=PromptAgentDefinition(
        model="gpt-4o-mini",
        instructions="Answer product questions using the knowledge base. Always cite your sources.",
        tools=[knowledge_tool]
    )
)
The agent now retrieves information from the knowledge base just like it would use any other tool. You don't write retrieval logic or manage search infrastructure.

The shared knowledge advantage
The real value of Foundry IQ emerges when you scale beyond one agent. Imagine your organization needs:

A support agent answering customer questions
An employee assistant helping with HR policies
A developer agent explaining API usage
With traditional RAG, you'd build and maintain three retrieval systems. With Foundry IQ, you create knowledge bases that multiple agents share:

The Product Documentation knowledge base serves both the support agent and developer agent
The HR Policies knowledge base serves only the employee assistant
Each agent accesses exactly the knowledge it needs
When you improve a knowledge base by adding data sources or refining content, every connected agent benefits immediately. This is how organizations build consistent, scalable AI agent systems.

Configure data sources for knowledge bases
Completed
100 XP
9 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Your knowledge base is only as good as the data it contains. Foundry IQ lets you connect to multiple data sources, enabling your AI agent to access the information it needs to answer questions accurately. You configure these sources when you set up your knowledge base, ensuring your agent has the right context for your specific use case.

Understanding which data source to use depends on where your data lives and how you need to access it. Foundry IQ supports six primary data source types:

Data Source	Access Type	Best For
Azure AI Search Index	Indexed	Enterprise search with custom pipelines
Azure Blob Storage	Direct	Document files in Azure Storage
Web	Real-time	Current, public information via Bing
SharePoint (Remote)	Real-time	Live SharePoint content with Microsoft 365 governance
SharePoint (Indexed)	Indexed	Advanced search on SharePoint with custom pipelines
OneLake	Direct	Unstructured data in Microsoft Fabric
With real-time sources, you get current information. With internal data sources like SharePoint or OneLake, you maintain security and governance while giving your agent access to proprietary knowledge.

Azure AI Search Index
Azure AI Search Index provides enterprise-scale search capabilities for your Foundry IQ knowledge base. This option is ideal when you already invested in Azure AI Search and want to use existing search indexes.

With this source, you connect directly to your Azure AI Search index, which can contain data from multiple origins that you've already processed and indexed. This becomes especially important when you need sophisticated search capabilities like semantic ranking, filters, or custom scoring profiles that Azure AI Search provides.

 Tip

Learn more about Azure AI Search and how to create and manage search indexes for your knowledge bases.

Your agent can query this index to retrieve relevant information based on user questions. Key benefits include:

Semantic ranking - Finds contextually relevant results, not just keyword matches
Custom scoring - Prioritizes results based on your business logic
Faceted navigation - Filters results by categories or attributes
Multi-language support - Handles content in different languages
Azure Blob Storage
Azure Blob Storage lets you retrieve documents and files directly from your blob containers. You select specific containers or blobs, and Foundry IQ processes the content to make it available to your agent.

This source works well when you store documents in Azure Blob Storage. Common file types include:

PDF documents
Microsoft Word files (.docx)
Text files (.txt)
Markdown files (.md)
HTML files
 Note

Unlike Azure AI Search, which requires you to build and maintain an index, Blob Storage provides a more direct path from your files to your knowledge base.

Building on this concept, you can organize your blobs into containers based on topics or access levels, making it easier to manage what information your agent can access. This organization helps maintain data governance while keeping your knowledge base current.

Web
Web access grounds your agent with real-time content from the internet via Bing. Instead of relying only on static, internal data, your agent can search for current information when answering questions.

This becomes especially important when users ask about:

Recent events or news
Current pricing or availability
Frequently changing information
Topics outside your internal knowledge base
 Important

With web grounding, you're relying on Bing's search results, which means less control over the specific sources your agent references. When accuracy and source verification are critical, consider using indexed, controlled data sources instead.

 Tip

You can combine web grounding with internal data sources, using web access as a supplementary source when internal knowledge doesn't provide an answer.

Microsoft SharePoint options
Foundry IQ provides two ways to connect to SharePoint, each with distinct advantages. The following table compares these approaches:

Feature	Remote	Indexed
Access method	Real-time queries	Preprocessed index
Response time	Depends on SharePoint	Faster
Maintenance	No index to maintain	Requires index updates
Advanced search	Limited	Full Azure AI Search capabilities
Data freshness	Always current	Depends on indexing schedule
Permission handling	Respects SharePoint permissions	Configured during indexing
SharePoint Remote
SharePoint Remote provides search capabilities with Microsoft 365 governance, retrieving content directly from SharePoint without preindexing. Your agent searches SharePoint sites and libraries in real-time when users ask questions.

Key benefits of remote access:

No index maintenance required
Always accesses current SharePoint content
Automatically respects existing SharePoint permissions
Simpler setup and configuration
 Tip

Use SharePoint Remote when you need the simplest path to SharePoint data and don't require advanced search features.

SharePoint Indexed
SharePoint Indexed takes a different approach by indexing SharePoint content into Azure AI Search for custom pipelines. Unlike remote access, which queries SharePoint in real-time, indexing processes your SharePoint content in advance.

This preprocessing means faster response times and more sophisticated search capabilities. With indexed content, you can:

Apply custom analyzers for specialized terminology
Build enrichment pipelines with AI services
Combine SharePoint data with other sources
Create specialized search experiences
 Note

Indexed SharePoint works best when you need advanced search features or when you're integrating SharePoint data with other sources in your Azure AI Search index.

Microsoft OneLake
Microsoft OneLake provides access to unstructured data stored in your Microsoft Fabric data lakehouse. You connect to OneLake to retrieve files and documents stored in your lakehouse, making this data available to your knowledge base.

 Tip

Learn more about Microsoft Fabric OneLake and how it serves as a unified data lake for your organization.

This option matters when your organization uses Microsoft Fabric for data analytics and storage. Common use cases include:

Business intelligence reports - Reference analytical findings in agent responses
Data documentation - Provide context about datasets and metrics
Analytical findings - Share insights from data science work
Research outputs - Make research accessible through conversational AI
With this connection, your agent can reference this information when answering business questions, providing data-driven responses grounded in your organization's analytical work.

Choose the right data source
Selecting the appropriate data source depends on several factors. Use this decision guide:

If your data is...	And you need...	Choose...
In SharePoint	Simple setup, always current	SharePoint Remote
In SharePoint	Advanced search, custom pipelines	SharePoint Indexed
Files in Azure	Direct file access	Azure Blob Storage
In Microsoft Fabric	Data lakehouse content	OneLake
Already indexed	Existing Azure AI Search investment	Azure AI Search Index
Public, current information	Real-time web content	Web

 Important

You can combine multiple sources in a single knowledge base. For example, use internal SharePoint data as the primary knowledge base while enabling web grounding for current events or supplementary information.

Configure retrieval with Foundry IQ
Completed
100 XP
8 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
You've built a knowledge base and optimized how content gets indexed. Now comes the critical step: configuring how agents retrieve and use that knowledge.

This is where many implementations fail. You can have perfectly indexed content with excellent semantic ranking, but if your agent doesn't know when or how to use the knowledge base, users get inconsistent results.

The retrieval behavior problem
Consider what happens without proper configuration. You ask your agent "What's our vacation policy?" Three different behaviors might occur:

Behavior	Example Response	Problem
Answers from training data	"Most companies offer 2-3 weeks of vacation annually"	Generic information, not your actual policy
Searches but doesn't cite	"You get 15 days of PTO annually"	Correct but unverifiable, no accountability
Searches, cites, and grounds	"You receive 15 days of paid time off annually【doc_id:1†Employee Handbook 2024】"	✓ This is what you want
Only the third behavior is acceptable for enterprise agents. The first provides wrong information. The second lacks accountability. You need agents that consistently retrieve, cite, and stay grounded in your knowledge base.

Controlling retrieval with instructions
Agent instructions determine retrieval behavior. Think of them as the contract between you and the agent about how it should use knowledge bases.

Here's a basic approach that produces inconsistent results:

Python
agent = project_client.agents.create_version(
    agent_name="hr-assistant",
    definition=PromptAgentDefinition(
        model="gpt-4o-mini",
        instructions="Answer HR questions using the knowledge base.",
        tools=[knowledge_tool]
    )
)
This instruction is too vague. "Using the knowledge base" doesn't specify when to use it or how to present results. The agent might search or might not. It might cite sources or might not.

Writing effective retrieval instructions
Effective instructions specify three critical behaviors:

When to retrieve: Tell the agent to always use the knowledge base, never rely on training data
How to cite: Specify the exact format for source attribution
What to do when unsure: Define fallback behavior when information isn't found
Here's how this looks in practice:

Python
retrieval_instructions = """You are a helpful HR assistant.

CRITICAL RULES:
- You must ALWAYS search the knowledge base before answering any question
- You must NEVER answer from your own knowledge or training data
- Every answer must include citations in this format: 【doc_id:search_id†source_name】
- If the knowledge base doesn't contain the answer, respond with "I don't have that information in our current documentation. Please contact HR directly at hr@company.com"

Your role is to provide accurate, verifiable information from company documentation."""

agent = project_client.agents.create_version(
    agent_name="hr-assistant",
    definition=PromptAgentDefinition(
        model="gpt-4o-mini",
        instructions=retrieval_instructions,
        tools=[knowledge_tool]
    )
)
These instructions create consistent behavior. The agent knows exactly when to search, how to format responses, and what to do when information isn't available.

Testing retrieval behavior
Instructions alone aren't enough. You need to verify that agents actually behave as configured. This requires systematic testing with different query types.

Setting up a test conversation
Create a conversation session and send test queries:

Python
openai_client = project_client.get_openai_client()
conversation = openai_client.conversations.create()

# Test query that should trigger retrieval
response = openai_client.responses.create(
    conversation=conversation.id,
    input="How many vacation days do I get?",
    extra_body={"agent": {"name": agent.name, "type": "agent_reference"}}
)

print(response.output_text)
What to test
Your test queries should cover different retrieval scenarios:

Query Type	Example Questions	Expected Behavior
Straightforward factual	"What is our vacation policy?"
"Where can I find the security guidelines?"	Direct retrieval with citations
Questions requiring synthesis	"What are the differences between our leave types?"
"How do I request time off?"	Multiple document retrieval, synthesized answer with multiple citations
Questions outside knowledge base	"What's the weather like today?"
"Tell me about machine learning"	Graceful fallback ("I don't have that information...")
Ambiguous questions	"What about benefits?"
"Tell me more about that"	Clarifying questions or focused search on most relevant topic
Evaluating response quality
Good responses demonstrate four characteristics:

Grounding - Information comes from knowledge base, not training data
Citation - Every factual claim includes source references
Relevance - Retrieved content actually answers the question
Completeness - All necessary information is provided, not just fragments
When you find responses that don't meet these criteria, adjust your instructions. Add more specific rules. Clarify edge cases. Iterate until behavior becomes consistent.

Retrieval strategies for different agent types
Different agent purposes require different retrieval approaches. A customer support agent needs different behavior than an internal research assistant.

Customer-facing support agents
These agents need high accuracy and must never provide uncertain information:

Python
support_instructions = """You provide customer support using our product documentation.

Rules:
- Search the knowledge base for every product question
- Cite documentation for all technical answers
- If documentation doesn't cover a question, say "Let me connect you with a specialist" rather than guessing
- Focus on official product information, not general knowledge"""
Internal research assistants
These agents can synthesize across documents and provide broader context:

Python
research_instructions = """You help employees research topics across company documentation.

Rules:
- Search all relevant knowledge bases for comprehensive answers
- Synthesize information from multiple sources when helpful
- Always cite all sources used
- Indicate confidence level when synthesizing across documents
- Suggest related topics that might be useful"""
Specialized domain experts
These agents focus deeply on specific knowledge domains:

Python
compliance_instructions = """You are a compliance documentation assistant.

Rules:
- Only answer questions about compliance policies and procedures
- Always cite the specific policy document and section
- If a question involves interpretation or legal advice, refer to the compliance team
- Keep answers strictly factual based on written policies
- Note the effective date of any policy you reference"""
The pattern is consistent: define the agent's scope, specify retrieval requirements, establish citation standards, and handle edge cases explicitly.

Moving from testing to production
Once your test queries produce consistent, high-quality results, you're ready to deploy. But production introduces new challenges.

Monitor actual usage patterns. Users ask questions differently than your test scenarios. Some questions hit edge cases you didn't anticipate. Others reveal gaps in your knowledge base content.

Track these patterns:

Citation frequency - Are agents consistently citing sources?
Fallback frequency - How often do agents say "I don't know"?
Query types - What categories of questions appear most often?
Retrieval accuracy - Do retrieved documents actually contain answers?
Use this data to refine instructions, improve knowledge base content, and adjust search configurations. Retrieval quality improves through iteration based on real-world usage.

The combination of clear instructions, systematic testing, and ongoing monitoring creates reliable knowledge retrieval that scales across your organization's agents.

Summary
Completed
100 XP
1 minute
Choose your preferred content format
You've learned how Foundry IQ transforms AI agents from simple chatbots into knowledge-enhanced enterprise tools capable of accessing your organization's information.

RAG solves the knowledge problem
Retrieval Augmented Generation addresses the fundamental limitations of AI agents by connecting them to real-time knowledge sources. Instead of relying only on training data, RAG-enabled agents retrieve relevant information, augment queries with factual context, and generate responses grounded in your organizational content. This provides real-time updates, source transparency, and factual grounding.

Foundry IQ provides a shared knowledge platform
Foundry IQ eliminates the need to build custom RAG infrastructure for every agent. You create knowledge bases organized by business domain, connect data sources from SharePoint, Azure Blob Storage, OneLake, or existing Azure AI Search indexes, and any agent can access them. When you improve a knowledge base, every connected agent benefits immediately. This shared approach scales knowledge access across your organization.

Data quality determines retrieval effectiveness
You improve retrieval through three key techniques:

Scoring profiles boost specific fields or attributes to surface more relevant results
Semantic ranking uses AI models to understand meaning and context beyond keywords
Custom analyzers handle specialized content like HTML, product codes, or technical terminology
These techniques work together to transform basic search into intelligent retrieval tailored to your content.

Instructions control agent behavior
Effective agent instructions specify when to retrieve (always use the knowledge base), how to cite (exact format for source attribution), and what to do when unsure (graceful fallback). Test different query types to verify consistent behavior. Monitor production usage to identify patterns and refine your configuration.

Introduction
Completed
100 XP
3 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Imagine you've built an AI agent in Microsoft Foundry that helps your team answer questions about company policies and procedures. The agent works great in the Foundry playground, but your users spend most of their day in Microsoft Teams. They want to interact with the agent directly in Teams chat, or even through Microsoft 365 Copilot, without switching to a separate application. How do you bridge this gap?

Microsoft Foundry provides built-in capabilities to publish your agents directly to Microsoft Teams and Microsoft 365 Copilot. This integration allows users to interact with your custom AI agents in the same tools they already use for collaboration and productivity. Whether you need a support agent that answers IT questions, a knowledge assistant that helps onboard new employees, or a specialized advisor for your business domain, you can make these agents available where your users work.

In this module, you learn how to publish Microsoft Foundry agents to Microsoft 365. You explore the publishing workflow from the Foundry portal, understand when you might need advanced integration options, and discover how to use Work IQ to give your agents access to Microsoft 365 data like emails, meetings, and documents.

Learning objectives
By the end of this module, you'll be able to:

Explain the options for publishing Foundry agents to Microsoft 365
Publish an agent from the Foundry portal to Teams and Microsoft 365 Copilot
Use Work IQ to access Microsoft 365 data in your agents
Test and troubleshoot agents integrated with Microsoft 365
Prerequisites
Familiarity with Azure and the Azure portal
Experience building agents in Microsoft Foundry (recommended: Develop AI agents with Microsoft Foundry and Visual Studio Code module)
A Microsoft 365 subscription with access to Teams
 Note

We recognize that different people like to learn in different ways. You can choose to complete this module in video-based format or you can read the content as text and images. The text contains greater detail than the videos, so in some cases you might want to refer to it as supplemental material to the video presentation.

Understand Foundry agent publishing options
Completed
100 XP
6 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
When you build an agent in Microsoft Foundry, it runs within the Foundry Agent Service infrastructure. Publishing promotes your agent from a development asset into a managed Azure resource with a dedicated endpoint, independent identity, and governance capabilities.

Understanding agent applications
When you publish an agent, Microsoft Foundry creates an Agent Application resource with:

Dedicated invocation URL: A stable endpoint that remains consistent as you update agent versions
Agent identity: A distinct Microsoft Entra identity separate from your development project
User data isolation: Inputs and interactions from one user aren't available to other users
The Agent Application acts as a routing layer. When you publish a new agent version, traffic automatically routes to the updated deployment without changing the public endpoint.

Publishing to Microsoft 365
The primary focus of this module is Microsoft 365 integration, which enables your agent to appear within Teams and Copilot. Publishing to Microsoft 365:

Creates an Azure Bot Service resource that routes messages between Microsoft 365 and your agent
Generates a Microsoft 365 publishing package for distribution
Registers a Microsoft Entra ID application for authentication
Makes your agent discoverable in the Teams agent store
Direct publishing from Foundry portal
The most straightforward approach is publishing directly from the Foundry portal. The publishing wizard:

Creates an Azure Bot Service resource in your subscription
Registers a Microsoft Entra ID application
Generates a Microsoft 365 publishing package
Prepares your agent for distribution
This approach is ideal when you want to deploy quickly or keep your agent logic entirely within Foundry.

Microsoft 365 Agents Toolkit
For complex scenarios, you can use the Microsoft 365 Agents Toolkit to create a proxy application that connects to your Foundry agent. Consider this approach when you need custom single sign-on (SSO), advanced middleware logic, or multi-environment deployment pipelines. The Agents Toolkit is covered later in this module as an optional advanced topic.

Publish scopes
When publishing to Microsoft 365, you choose between two distribution scopes:

Scope	Description	Best for
Shared	Available immediately without admin approval. Appears under Your agents in Teams.	Personal testing, small team pilots
Organization	Available to everyone in your tenant under Built by your org. Requires admin approval.	Production deployments
Other publishing channels
While this module focuses on Microsoft 365, Foundry agents can also publish to:

Web application preview: Browser-based interface for demos and stakeholder testing
Stable API endpoint: REST API for embedding in custom applications
Azure Bot Service channels: Slack, Telegram, Twilio (SMS), Facebook, and others
These options are useful when you need to reach users outside Microsoft 365 or embed your agent in custom applications.

Agent identity and permissions
When you publish an agent, the system creates a distinct agent identity. This matters because:

The agent authenticates to Azure resources using its own identity
Development-time permissions on your project identity don't transfer automatically
Tools that access Azure services need permissions reconfigured after publishing
If your agent uses tools that connect to services like Azure AI Search, grant the published agent's identity appropriate permissions.

Prerequisites for publishing
Before publishing an agent to Microsoft 365, ensure you have:

Azure AI Project Manager role on your Foundry project
Azure AI User role on the agent application scope
An Azure subscription where you can create Azure Bot Service resources
Permissions to register applications in Microsoft Entra ID
A Microsoft 365 tenant that allows custom apps and bots

Publish an agent from Foundry portal to Teams
Completed
100 XP
10 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Publishing an agent from the Microsoft Foundry portal to Microsoft Teams and Microsoft 365 Copilot is a straightforward process. The portal guides you through creating an agent application, provisioning the required Azure resources, and generating a publishing package for distribution.

Before you begin
Before starting the publishing process, complete these preparation steps:

Test your agent thoroughly
Use the Foundry playground to verify your agent behaves as expected. Test various user inputs, confirm any configured tools work correctly, and check that responses are appropriate for your use case. Issues are easier to fix before publishing than after.

Verify your permissions
Confirm you have the required role assignments:

Azure AI Project Manager role on your Foundry project to publish agents
Azure AI User role to invoke or chat with published agents
Permissions to create resources in your Azure subscription
Permissions to register applications in Microsoft Entra ID
Register the Bot Service provider
The publishing process creates an Azure Bot Service resource. Ensure the Microsoft.BotService provider is registered in your Azure subscription. You can check this in the Azure portal under your subscription's Resource providers section.

Prepare metadata
Gather the following information before starting:

A display name for your agent (appears in the Teams agent store)
A brief description of what your agent does
Small (32x32 pixels) and large (192x192 pixels) icons in PNG format
Your organization's name and contact details
URLs for your privacy policy and terms of use
 Warning

Don't include secrets, API keys, or sensitive information in any metadata fields. These fields are visible to users who discover your agent.

Publish your agent
Follow these steps to publish your agent from the Foundry portal:

Step 1: Select your agent version
Open the Microsoft Foundry portal and navigate to your project.
Select the agent you want to publish from your agent list.
Review the agent configuration to confirm it's ready for publishing.
Step 2: Start the publishing process
Select Publish to open the publishing dialog.
Select Publish again, then choose Publish to Teams and Microsoft 365 Copilot.
The Microsoft 365 publishing configuration window opens.
Step 3: Configure Azure Bot Service
The portal automatically generates an application ID and tenant ID. Note these values for troubleshooting.
In the Azure Bot Service dropdown, select Create an Azure Bot Service to provision a new bot resource.
Wait for the portal to create the Bot Service resource in your subscription.
Step 4: Complete the metadata
Fill in the required fields:

Field	Description
Name	Display name for your agent in the Teams store
Description	Brief explanation of what your agent does
Icons	Upload small and large PNG icons
Publisher information	Your organization name and contact details
Privacy policy	URL to your organization's privacy policy
Terms of use	URL to your terms of service
Step 5: Choose your publish scope
Select the distribution scope for your agent:

Shared scope: Agent appears under "Your agents" in the store. Available immediately. Best for testing and small teams.
Organization scope: Agent appears under "Built by your org" in the store. Requires admin approval. Best for production deployments.
Step 6: Prepare and optionally download the package
Select Prepare Agent to start packaging your agent.
Wait for the packaging process to complete (typically 1-2 minutes).
When ready, you can either:
Download the package to test locally before distribution
Continue the in-product publishing flow for direct distribution
Test the publishing package in Teams
If you downloaded the package, test it in Teams before broad distribution:

Open Microsoft Teams.
Navigate to Apps > Manage your apps > Upload an app.
Select Upload a custom app and choose the downloaded .zip file.
Teams installs the app and shows it in your apps list.
Open the agent and send a test message.
Verify the following:

[ ] The agent responds to messages
[ ] Response content is accurate and appropriate
[ ] Response times are acceptable
[ ] Any configured tools work correctly
Request admin approval for organization scope
If you published with organization scope, an administrator must approve your agent before it's available organization-wide:

Direct your Microsoft 365 administrator to the Microsoft 365 admin center.
Navigate to Agents > All > Requested.
Find your agent in the list of pending requests.
The administrator selects Approve request and activate.
Once approved, the agent appears in the Built by your org section of the Teams agent store for all users in your tenant. App policies in your organization control which users can access the agent.

Reassign permissions after publishing
When you publish an agent, the system creates a distinct agent identity. If your agent uses tools that access Azure resources, you need to grant permissions to this new identity:

In the Foundry portal, go to your published agent and note the agent application's identity information.
In the Azure portal, navigate to the resources your agent accesses (for example, Azure AI Search, storage accounts, or Cosmos DB).
Assign the appropriate RBAC roles to the published agent identity.
Without this step, tools that worked during development might fail after publishing because the new agent identity lacks the required permissions.

Update a published agent
When you make changes to your agent in Foundry, you need to republish to update the version available in Teams:

Make your changes in the Foundry portal.
Test the changes in the Foundry playground.
Repeat the publishing process to create a new package.
For shared scope, upload the new package to Teams.
For organization scope, the update might require re-approval depending on your organization's policies.
Users interacting with your agent receive the updated version once the new package is deployed.

Advanced - Use Microsoft 365 Agents Toolkit
Completed
100 XP
6 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
For most scenarios, publishing directly from the Foundry portal is the simplest path to get your agents into Microsoft Teams and Microsoft 365 Copilot. However, some complex enterprise scenarios require additional control over the integration layer. The Microsoft 365 Agents Toolkit provides an alternative approach for these situations.

This unit covers the Agents Toolkit from a high level perspective. Follow the links to documentation at the end for a deeper explanation.

 Note

This unit covers an advanced topic. If you're getting started with Foundry agent integration, you can skip this unit and return later if you encounter scenarios that require the Agents Toolkit approach.

When to consider the Agents Toolkit
The Microsoft 365 Agents Toolkit is a suite of development tools available as extensions for Visual Studio Code and Visual Studio. Consider using it when your agent requires custom single sign-on (SSO) configuration beyond the default Entra ID setup, or when you need to add middleware logic for custom processing, logging, or transformation between Teams and your Foundry agent.

The toolkit is also valuable for organizations that require multi-environment deployment with separate development, staging, and production configurations. It provides advanced debugging capabilities with detailed tracing beyond what the Foundry portal offers, and integrates with CI/CD pipelines through GitHub Actions or Azure DevOps.

How the Agents Toolkit approach works
Instead of publishing directly from Foundry, you create a proxy application using the Agents Toolkit that sits between Microsoft 365 and your Foundry agent:

Teams/Copilot → Proxy App (Agents Toolkit) → Foundry Agent
This proxy application receives messages from Teams or Copilot through Azure Bot Service, processes them through any custom middleware you've configured, forwards the request to your Foundry agent, and returns the response through the same path. The proxy approach gives you control over every step of the message flow, but adds complexity to your deployment.

Getting started with the Agents Toolkit
If you determine the Agents Toolkit is right for your scenario, here's an overview of the setup process.

Start by installing the Microsoft 365 Agents Toolkit extension from the Visual Studio Code marketplace. Once installed, open the extension panel and select Create a New Agent/App, then choose Custom Engine Agent as the project type. The wizard guides you through configuration options including your AI model source.

The project template creates scaffolding for a standalone agent. To connect to an existing Foundry agent, configure the project to call your Foundry agent's endpoint, set up authentication using the agent's credentials, and implement any middleware logic you need.

The Agents Toolkit includes the Microsoft 365 Agents Playground, a local testing environment that simulates Teams. Run your project in debug mode to open the playground in your browser, where you can send test messages to verify the connection works correctly. Once testing is complete, use the toolkit to provision Azure resources, deploy your proxy application, and register it in Teams.

Comparison summary
Aspect	Direct Foundry publishing	Agents Toolkit proxy
Setup time	Minutes	Hours to days
Code required	None	Proxy application
Customization	Limited	Extensive
Debugging	Foundry portal	Full IDE debugging
Best for	Standard deployments	Complex enterprise needs
Learn more
For detailed guidance on the Agents Toolkit, see:

Microsoft 365 Agents Toolkit documentation
Create custom engine agents with the Agents Toolkit
Microsoft 365 Agents SDK overview
The direct publishing approach covered in the previous unit handles the majority of integration scenarios. Reserve the Agents Toolkit for situations where you've identified specific requirements it addresses.

Access Microsoft 365 data with Work IQ
Completed
100 XP
8 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
When building agents that help users with workplace tasks, access to organizational data can dramatically improve the agent's usefulness. Microsoft Work IQ provides a way to connect AI agents to Microsoft 365 data, including emails, meetings, documents, Teams messages, and people information.

What is Work IQ?
Microsoft Work IQ is a command-line interface (CLI) and server that connects AI assistants to your Microsoft 365 Copilot data. It enables agents to query workplace information using natural language, providing rich context that helps agents give more relevant and accurate responses.

With Work IQ, your agents can answer questions like:

"What did my manager say about the project deadline?"
"Find my recent documents about Q4 planning"
"Summarize today's messages in the Engineering channel"
"Who is working on Project Alpha?"
Work IQ accesses data across multiple Microsoft 365 services:

Data type	Example capabilities
Emails	Search messages, find communications from specific people
Meetings	Check calendar, retrieve meeting notes and decisions
Documents	Find files in SharePoint and OneDrive, search content
Teams messages	Summarize channel discussions, find specific conversations
People	Identify team members, find collaborators on projects
Understanding MCP servers
Work IQ is built on the Model Context Protocol (MCP), an open protocol that enables AI assistants to connect to external data sources and tools. Understanding MCP helps explain how Work IQ functions.

An MCP server exposes capabilities that AI agents can use. These capabilities might include:

Tools: Actions the agent can take, like searching for documents or sending messages
Resources: Data sources the agent can query
Prompts: Predefined templates for common queries
When you configure an MCP server for your agent, the agent discovers what tools and resources are available and can use them to fulfill user requests. Work IQ acts as an MCP server specifically designed for Microsoft 365 data.

How Work IQ operates
Work IQ runs in two modes:

CLI mode
In CLI mode, you run queries directly from your terminal:

Bash
workiq ask -q "What requirements did Sarah share about the authentication feature?"
This mode is useful for quick queries during development or for scripts that need to retrieve workplace information.

MCP server mode
In MCP server mode, Work IQ integrates with AI assistants like GitHub Copilot in Visual Studio Code. Your AI assistant can automatically access workplace context when relevant to your work.

For example, if you're implementing a feature that was discussed in a recent meeting, your AI assistant can access that meeting context to provide more relevant suggestions.

Installing Work IQ
You can install Work IQ in several ways depending on your preferred workflow.

Install using npm
Bash
# Global installation
npm install -g @microsoft/workiq

# Or run directly without installation
npx -y @microsoft/workiq mcp
Install using GitHub Copilot CLI
If you use GitHub Copilot CLI, you can install Work IQ as a plugin:

Open GitHub Copilot CLI by running copilot.
Add the plugins marketplace (one-time setup): /plugin marketplace add github/copilot-plugins
Install Work IQ: /plugin install workiq@copilot-plugins
Restart Copilot CLI and start querying your Microsoft 365 data.
Configure for Visual Studio Code
You can add Work IQ as an MCP server through the VS Code settings. Add the following to your MCP configuration:

JSON
{
  "workiq": {
    "command": "npx",
    "args": [
      "-y",
      "@microsoft/workiq",
      "mcp"
    ],
    "tools": [
      "*"
    ]
  }
}
Before first use, accept the End User License Agreement:

Bash
workiq accept-eula
Prerequisites for Work IQ
To use Work IQ, you need:

Node.js installed on your machine (if using the CLI locally)
A Microsoft 365 subscription with a Copilot license
Administrative consent for the Work IQ application in your Microsoft Entra tenant
 Important

Work IQ requires administrative consent because it accesses organization-wide Microsoft 365 data. If you're not a tenant administrator, contact your IT department to request access.

Security and data access
Work IQ inherits the security model of Microsoft 365 Copilot:

Permission-based access: Work IQ can only access data you already have permission to view
No data storage: Work IQ doesn't store your Microsoft 365 data; it retrieves information on-demand
Enterprise security: All data access follows your organization's security policies
Admin visibility: Administrators can monitor and control Work IQ usage
When you query Work IQ, it accesses data through Microsoft Graph with your authenticated identity. This means:

You can't access documents you don't have permission to view
Queries are auditable by your organization
Data protection policies apply to Work IQ queries
Using Work IQ with agent development
Work IQ helps you understand the context your users work in during agent development. You can interact with Work IQ through either the CLI or the MCP server, depending on your workflow.

CLI approach
The CLI is useful for quick, ad-hoc queries during development. Run the workiq ask command directly from your terminal:

Bash
# Find project context
workiq ask -q "What were the key decisions in last week's architecture review meeting?"

# Understand requirements from documents
workiq ask -q "Summarize the requirements in the user portal spec document"

# Check team communications
workiq ask -q "What has the engineering team discussed about the API changes?"
The CLI approach works well for scripts, one-off queries, or when you need quick answers without opening an IDE.

MCP server approach
When Work IQ runs as an MCP server, your AI assistant can access the same Microsoft 365 data automatically. Instead of running CLI commands, you interact naturally with your AI assistant, which calls Work IQ tools behind the scenes.

For example, in VS Code with GitHub Copilot configured to use Work IQ:

Ask Copilot: "What requirements did Sarah share about the authentication feature?"
Copilot uses Work IQ's MCP tools to query your Microsoft 365 data
You receive the answer in the chat without running any commands
The MCP approach integrates workplace context seamlessly into your development workflow. Your AI assistant decides when to query Work IQ based on your questions, making the experience feel natural rather than requiring explicit commands.

Both approaches access the same underlying data with the same permissions. Choose the CLI for scripting and quick terminal queries, or the MCP server for integrated AI assistant experiences.

 Note

Work IQ is currently in preview. Features and APIs may change as the product evolves.

Test and iterate your integrated agent
Completed
100 XP
6 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
After publishing your agent using the steps in the previous units, ongoing testing and monitoring help ensure your agent performs reliably for users. This unit focuses on post-deployment testing strategies, troubleshooting common issues, and monitoring your agent over time.

Testing beyond the Foundry playground
The Foundry playground is valuable for development testing, but it doesn't simulate the full published experience. After publishing, test your agent in Microsoft Teams to verify:

The Teams user interface renders responses correctly
Authentication flows work as expected
Response times are acceptable in production
The published agent identity has necessary permissions
Testing with multiple users
Have colleagues test your agent to discover issues you might miss. Different users phrase questions differently, and fresh perspectives identify confusing responses. Testing across different Teams clients (desktop, web, mobile) can also reveal platform-specific issues.

Common troubleshooting scenarios
When issues arise, these common scenarios and resolutions can help:

Agent doesn't respond in Teams
Possible causes:

Azure Bot Service isn't running
Bot Service configuration is incorrect
Network issues between Teams and your agent
Resolution:

Verify the Bot Service resource exists in the Azure portal.
Check Bot Service logs for errors.
Confirm the agent is published and the package was uploaded correctly.
Tools work in Foundry but fail in Teams
Possible cause: The published agent identity doesn't have the required permissions.

Resolution:

Find the published agent's identity in the Foundry portal.
In the Azure portal, locate the resources your tools access.
Assign appropriate RBAC roles to the published agent identity.
Users can't find the agent
Possible causes:

Wrong publish scope selected
Admin approval pending (for organization scope)
Tenant policies block custom apps
Resolution:

For shared scope: Share the direct link with users.
For organization scope: Verify admin approval in the Microsoft 365 admin center.
Check tenant settings for custom app permissions.
Slow response times
Possible causes:

Complex agent instructions requiring extended processing
Tools that query large data sets
Network latency
Resolution:

Simplify agent instructions where possible.
Optimize tool configurations.
Test from different network locations to isolate network issues.
Monitoring published agents
After deployment, ongoing monitoring helps identify issues before users report them:

Check Foundry metrics
The Foundry portal provides metrics for published agents:

Request volume and patterns
Response times
Error rates
Tool invocation statistics
Review these metrics regularly to spot trends that indicate problems.

Review Application Insights
If you've configured Application Insights integration, you can:

Trace individual conversations
Analyze error patterns
Measure end-to-end latency
Set up alerts for anomalies
Gather user feedback
Establish channels for users to report issues:

Create a Teams channel or email address for agent feedback
Periodically review feedback to identify common problems
Use feedback to prioritize agent improvements
Iterating on your agent
When testing reveals issues or you receive user feedback, update your agent in the Foundry portal and republish following the same process covered in the publishing unit. For organization scope deployments, check your tenant's policies to determine if updates require re-approval.

 Tip

Keep a testing checklist specific to your agent. Document the key scenarios you test before each release to ensure consistent quality.

Summary
Completed
100 XP
2 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
In this module, you learned how to publish Microsoft Foundry agents to Microsoft Teams and Microsoft 365 Copilot, making your AI assistants available where users already work.

You explored the direct publishing workflow from the Foundry portal, which automatically provisions Azure Bot Service and creates the necessary Microsoft Entra ID registrations. You also learned about the Microsoft 365 Agents Toolkit as an alternative for complex enterprise scenarios.

The module covered publish scopes (shared for testing, organization for broad distribution), agent identity considerations for RBAC permissions, and how Work IQ connects agents to Microsoft 365 data through the Model Context Protocol (MCP).

Introduction
Completed
100 XP
1 minute
Choose your preferred content format
Modern AI solutions often rely on multiple agents working together to analyze inputs, make decisions, and take action. In Microsoft Foundry, agent workflows provide a way to orchestrate these interactions using a combination of agents, control flow, and runtime safeguards.

Foundry includes a visual workflow builder that lets you design and test these systems without writing extensive code. Using the canvas, you can define how agents are invoked, how data moves between steps, and how decisions are made based on agent outputs. You can also observe execution paths and inspect intermediate results to understand how your workflow behaves at runtime.

Suppose you're a developer responsible for automating customer support workflows at a growing SaaS company. Your team receives a steady stream of support tickets ranging from billing disputes to API errors and simple how-to questions. Manually reviewing each request doesn't scale, but fully automating responses isn't always safe. Workflows allow you to combine multiple AI agents, conditional logic, and human-in-the-loop escalation. By using agent-driven workflows, you can triage multiple support requests efficiently and at scale while maintaining reliability and control.

After completing this module, you'll be able to:
Explain how workflow nodes, variables, and agent outputs work together to control execution paths.
Use structured agent outputs and conditional logic to route requests to the appropriate workflow steps.
Implement loops (For-Each) to process multiple inputs efficiently within a single workflow.
Apply human-in-the-loop and escalation patterns to manage uncertainty and low-confidence agent responses.
Utilize Power Fx expressions to manipulate data, evaluate conditions, and control flow within workflows.
 Note

We recognize that different people like to learn in different ways. You can choose to complete this module in video-based format or you can read the content as text and images. The text contains greater detail than the videos, so in some cases you might want to refer to it as supplemental material to the video presentation.

Understand Workflows
Completed
100 XP
1 minute
Choose your preferred content format
Workflows in Microsoft Foundry provide a way to orchestrate AI-driven actions using a visual, declarative approach. Rather than writing code, you define a sequence of steps that describe what should happen and when, allowing the platform to manage execution and state. This makes workflows well-suited for business processes that combine AI reasoning, logic, and user interaction.

A workflow consists of connected nodes, where each node performs a specific function. Some nodes invoke agents, while others evaluate conditions, manage data, or communicate with users. Together, these nodes form an execution path that determines how requests move through the system. By arranging and configuring nodes, you control how information flows and how decisions are made.

A screenshot of a group chat workflow in Microsoft Foundry.

One of the key advantages of workflows is their ability to coordinate multiple agents. Single-agent solutions often struggle with complex or ambiguous tasks, but workflows allow you to combine agents with different responsibilities—such as classification, decision-making, and resolution—into a cohesive process. This orchestration enables more robust and scalable automation.

Workflows also support patterns that balance automation with oversight. In scenarios where confidence is low or more context is required, workflows can pause execution, request human input, or escalate decisions. This flexibility makes workflows suitable for real-world systems where reliability and control are just as important as efficiency.

By understanding what workflows are and the problems they're designed to solve, you establish the conceptual foundation needed to build, extend, and reason about agent-driven systems in Microsoft Foundry.

Identify Workflow Patterns
Completed
100 XP
3 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
When building agent-driven solutions, the structure of your workflow matters as much as the agents themselves. Different problems require different orchestration approaches, depending on how decisions are made, how data flows, and whether human input is required. Microsoft Foundry provides several predefined workflow patterns that help you model these interactions clearly and consistently.

A sequential workflow follows a fixed, step-by-step path. Each node executes in order, passing its output to the next step in the workflow. This pattern works well for pipelines and multi-stage processes, such as validating input, enriching data, and generating a final response. Sequential workflows are predictable and easy to reason about, making them a good starting point when you're learning how workflows operate.

A human-in-the-loop workflow introduces pauses where user input or approval is required before the workflow can continue. In this pattern, the workflow explicitly asks a question, waits for a response, and then resumes execution based on that input. Human-in-the-loop workflows are useful when automation must be balanced with oversight—such as approvals, confirmations, or situations where missing context needs to be provided by a person.

A group chat workflow enables more dynamic orchestration across multiple agents. Instead of following a fixed path, control can shift between agents based on context, rules, or intermediate results. This pattern is useful for scenarios where multiple specialized agents collaborate to handle complex requests, such as customer support or multi-domain question answering. Group chat workflows allow for flexible interactions, where agents can build on each other's outputs and adapt to changing inputs.

Each pattern provides a foundation for structuring agent interactions, managing control flow, and incorporating human input as needed. By recognizing these workflow patterns and understanding their strengths, you can choose an orchestration approach that aligns with your scenario before you begin designing a workflow.

Create workflows in Microsoft Foundry
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Microsoft Foundry provides a visual designer that lets you build workflows as a sequence of connected nodes. Each node represents a specific action—such as invoking an agent, evaluating logic, or transforming data—and the connections between nodes define how execution flows from one step to the next. This visual approach makes it easier to reason about orchestration logic and understand how agents interact within a larger process.

You can start a workflow from a blank canvas or by selecting a predefined pattern, such as a sequential workflow. The designer displays the workflow as a series of nodes laid out in execution order. As you build, you can move nodes, insert new steps, and inspect configuration details directly within the canvas. Because workflows aren't saved automatically, it's important to save your changes regularly to preserve each version of your design.

A screenshot of the Microsoft Foundry workflow designer showing available node types.

The main node types in the workflow builder are:

Invoke: Invokes an AI agent from your project or creates a new one. Agent nodes can return free-text responses or structured outputs (like JSON) that other nodes can use. They're used for classification, reasoning, recommendations, or any AI-driven task.

Flow: Controls the workflow's execution path. Flow nodes let your workflow adapt dynamically to different inputs or situations. Flow nodes include:

If/Else: Branches execution based on conditions.
Go To: Jumps to another node in the workflow.
For Each: Loops over a list of items, performing the same actions for each one.
Data transformation: Manipulates data and manages variables. Data transformation nodes ensure that information is correctly passed to subsequent steps. Data transformation nodes include:

Set Variable: Assigns a value to a variable for later use.
Reset Variable: Clears or reinitializes a variable.
Parse value: Extracts specific data from structured outputs or converts values to different formats.
Basic chat: Sends messages to the user or asks questions to collect input. These nodes are often paired with variables to capture responses, which can then influence logic or agent decisions later in the workflow.

End: Marks the conclusion of a workflow. The End node can optionally return a final result or status.

flow that determines how each step is executed. Variables provide shared state across nodes, allowing outputs from one step—such as agent results or user input—to inform decisions or trigger more actions. While agent nodes are an important part of a workflow, effective automation relies on the coordinated use of all node types.

Workflows execute within a conversational context, letting you interact with them through the chat window. This interactivity allows you to observe how inputs move through the nodes and validate that each step behaves as expected before adding more complexity. As workflows grow, the visual designer makes it easy to trace execution paths and quickly identify where logic branches or decisions occur.

Understanding nodes and how to combine them gives you the foundation for creating workflows that integrate AI reasoning, data handling, and control logic. Nodes are the building blocks you assemble to turn concepts and automation goals into functional, scalable workflows.

Add Agents to a Workflow
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Agents are the core reasoning components within a Microsoft Foundry workflow. By adding agents to a workflow, you enable AI-driven decision-making, classification, and response generation as part of a larger orchestration. Each agent can be configured with a specific purpose, model, prompt, and set of tools, allowing workflows to combine multiple specialized capabilities.

You add agents to a workflow by inserting an Invoke agent node. This node can reference an existing agent from your Foundry project, or you can create a new agent directly within the workflow designer. The Invoke agent editor allows you to configure tools, knowledge bases, memory, and guardrails for the agent, tailoring its behavior to the workflow's needs. When you invoke an agent, the workflow passes context—such as user input or previously set variables—to the agent and receives a response that can be used in subsequent steps.

Agents can be reused across multiple workflows, which encourages modular design. For example, a single categorization agent might be invoked in many workflows to classify incoming requests, while different resolution agents handle follow-up actions. This separation of concerns makes workflows easier to maintain and evolve over time.

In addition to generating natural language responses, agents can be configured to return structured output. By defining a response format such as a JSON schema, you ensure that agent output follows a predictable shape. Structured outputs are especially useful when agent responses drive control flow, such as routing logic or variable assignment in later nodes. You can define an agent's output schema in the parameters of the Details tab of the Invoke agent editor.

Screenshot of the Invoke agent node parameters showing the response schema configuration.

Once an agent is added to a workflow, its output can be stored in a variable and referenced throughout the workflow. Using variables allows agents to influence decisions, trigger conditional branches, or provide input to other agents. You can configure variable storage in the Action settings of the Invoke agent node.

Screenshot showing how to store agent output in a variable for later use in the workflow.

By thoughtfully adding and configuring agents, you transform a simple sequence of actions into an intelligent, adaptive workflow.

Apply Power Fx in Workflows
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Power Fx is the low-code, Excel-like language that acts as the glue of a workflow. It allows you to manipulate data, evaluate conditions, and control the flow of execution without writing complex code. In a workflow, Power Fx formulas are used wherever decisions are made, variables are set, or loops are applied, enabling workflows to react dynamically to user input, agent outputs, or stored data.

How formulas work
A Power Fx formula is an expression that evaluates to a value. Formulas can reference system and local variables:

System variables provide contextual information about the workflow or conversation, such as the current activity, last message, or user info.
Local variables store data captured or created during workflow execution and can be used in subsequent nodes.
For example, you might create formulas to:

Convert a user's input to uppercase: Upper(Local.Input)
Check whether an agent's confidence score is above a threshold: Local.Confidence > 0.8
Sum values in a list or a column of records: Sum(Local.ItemList, Amount)
Using variables in formulas allows workflows to adapt based on context and previous steps.

Conditions as decision points
Power Fx expressions are commonly used in If/Else nodes to evaluate conditions and branch execution. Conditions can reference system or local variables, structured agent outputs, or other workflow data. For example, a workflow might check an agent's confidence score to decide whether to continue processing automatically or escalate to a human.

Loops for processing multiple items
For-each nodes use Power Fx to iterate over collections, applying the same set of actions to each item. By combining loops with variables and conditions, workflows can handle lists of inputs—such as multiple support tickets—without duplicating nodes or logic.

Power Fx formula examples
Purpose	Formula Example	Notes
Convert text to uppercase	Upper(Local.Input)	Transforms a string to all caps
Convert text to lowercase	Lower(Local.Input)	Transforms a string to all lowercase
Get string length	Len(Local.Input)	Returns the number of characters in a string
Conditional check	Local.Confidence > 0.8	Returns true/false; used in If/Else nodes
If/Else logic	If(Local.Confidence > 0.8, "Proceed", "Escalate")	Returns one of two values depending on a condition
Sum a list of numbers	Sum([10, 20, 30])	Adds up numbers in a simple list
Sum a column in a table	Sum(Local.ItemList, Amount)	Adds up the Amount property of each record in a table
Count items in a table or list	Count(Local.ItemList)	Returns the number of items
Check if blank	IsBlank(Local.Input)	Returns true if variable or input is empty
Check if empty table	IsEmpty(Local.ItemList)	Returns true if a table has no records
Loop over items	ForAll(Local.ItemList, Upper(Name))	Applies a formula to each item in a list or table
Concatenate text	Concatenate(Local.FirstName, " ", Local.LastName)	Joins multiple strings into one
By using Power Fx formulas throughout a workflow, you create dynamic, data-driven processes that respond intelligently to inputs and agent outputs. This low-code approach empowers you to build complex logic while keeping workflows maintainable and understandable.

 Tip

For more information about the Power Fx language, visit the Power Fx documentation.

Maintain Workflows in Microsoft Foundry
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Building a workflow is just the first step—real-world automation evolves over time. Maintaining and refining workflows ensures that they remain reliable, understandable, and adaptable as business needs or AI models change. Using Microsoft Foundry's built-in features, you can effectively manage workflow versions, document changes, and keep both visual and YAML representations in sync.

YAML and visual representations
Microsoft Foundry workflows can be represented in both a visual canvas and YAML. The visual canvas is ideal for conceptual understanding, tracing execution paths, and collaborating with others. YAML provides a textual representation of the workflow, which can be edited for advanced configuration, version tracking, or integration with source control. Changes in either view are reflected in the other, giving flexibility while keeping workflows consistent.

Versioning
Every time a workflow is saved, Foundry automatically creates a new, immutable version. Versioning provides a safety net: you can review prior versions, compare changes, or roll back to an earlier workflow if a modification introduces errors. Versioning also supports collaboration, making it easier to track who made changes and why.

Adding notes for maintainers
The workflow visualizer allows you to attach notes to nodes or sections of the workflow. Notes provide context, explain design decisions, or clarify variable usage. Adding clear documentation helps future maintainers or team members understand the workflow's purpose and logic, reducing errors and accelerating updates.

Screenshot of a note added to the workflow providing guidance.

Best practices for refinement
Maintaining workflows is not just about fixing errors—it's about improving clarity, reliability, and efficiency. Best practices include:

Regularly reviewing workflows for unused or redundant nodes.
Ensuring structured agent outputs are consistently handled.
Documenting decisions and logic with notes.
Leveraging version history to track changes and validate updates.
By combining YAML editing, version control, and thoughtful documentation, you ensure that workflows are robust, maintainable, and ready for enterprise use. This focus on maintainability allows teams to scale automation with confidence and adaptability.


Use workflows in code
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
After designing and testing a workflow in the Microsoft Foundry visual designer, you can integrate it into your applications using the Azure AI Projects SDK. This allows you to embed workflow-driven automation into web apps, APIs, backend services, and other software solutions.

Workflows are created in the Foundry portal using the visual designer, which generates the underlying YAML definition. Once a workflow is saved in your project, you can invoke it programmatically by referencing its name. You can also download the workflow's YAML definition from the portal and include it in your codebase.

Invoke a workflow
Before running a workflow, establish a connection to your Microsoft Foundry project using the AIProjectClient. This client handles authentication and provides access to the OpenAI-compatible API for executing conversations and invoking workflows. To run an existing workflow in your project, create a conversation and invoke the workflow by name.

Python
# Reference a workflow created in the Foundry portal
workflow_name = "triage-workflow"

# Create a conversation context for the workflow
conversation = openai_client.conversations.create()

# Execute the workflow, passing input to drive the workflow logic
stream = openai_client.responses.create(
    conversation=conversation.id,
    extra_body={"agent": {"name": workflow_name, "type": "agent_reference"}},
    input="Users can't reset their password from the mobile app.",
    stream=True,
)
The input parameter lets you pass a prompt or message to the workflow, which the workflow can use to drive its logic—such as processing a user request, triaging a support ticket, or answering a question. Depending on how your workflow is designed, this input might be:

A user question that agents analyze and respond to
A support ticket description for classification and routing
A data payload that triggers processing logic
An empty string that simply starts the workflow without specific input
Process workflow events
When streaming is enabled, your application receives events as the workflow executes. These events let you display real-time progress, capture agent outputs, and respond to workflow actions.

Python
for event in stream:
    if event.type == "response.completed":
        print("Workflow completed:")
        for message in event.response.output:
            if message.content:
                for content_item in message.content:
                    if content_item.type == 'output_text':
                        print(content_item.text)
    if (event.type == "response.output_item.done") and event.item.type == ItemType.WORKFLOW_ACTION:
        print(f"Action '{event.item.action_id}' completed with status: {event.item.status}")
Common event types include:

Event Type	Description
response.completed	The workflow finished executing and returned a final response
response.output_item.done	An individual output item (such as a workflow action) completed
By monitoring these events, you can see how the workflow progresses in real-time, or trigger external actions based on workflow state. Alternatively, you can choose to wait for the entire workflow to complete and process the final response without streaming. For workflows that include human-in-the-loop patterns, your application may need to handle pauses where the workflow waits for user input. In these cases, you can send additional messages to the conversation to provide the requested input and resume workflow execution.

Benefits of code integration
Integrating workflows into your code enables several scenarios:

Scenario	Benefit
Web applications	Embed AI-driven workflows directly in user-facing apps
APIs and microservices	Expose workflow capabilities through REST endpoints
Batch processing	Invoke workflows programmatically for bulk operations
Testing and validation	Automate workflow testing as part of CI/CD pipelines
Custom interfaces	Build specialized UIs tailored to specific workflow use cases
By combining the visual design experience of the Foundry portal with the flexibility of code integration, you can create powerful AI-driven solutions that fit seamlessly into your existing software architecture.

Summary
Completed
100 XP
1 minute
Choose your preferred content format
In this module, you explored the foundational concepts and practices for designing agent-driven workflows in Microsoft Foundry. You began by understanding what workflows are and why they provide a structured way to orchestrate AI reasoning, logic, and user interaction. You then learned how to compose workflows by combining nodes—including agents, logic, data transformation, and chat—into sequences that define both actions and control flow.

You discovered how agents generate structured outputs, how these outputs are captured in variables, and how they drive workflow decisions such as routing, escalation, or continuation. You also explored how Power Fx acts as a low-code “glue” language, enabling workflows to transform data, evaluate conditions, and iterate over multiple items using loops. The module emphasized how variables, conditions, and loops move data through a workflow, creating adaptive, intelligent behavior.

Finally, you learned how to maintain and refine workflows using versioning, notes, and dual visual/YAML representations. These practices ensure that workflows remain reliable, understandable, and scalable—ready for real-world, enterprise applications.

By combining these concepts, you now have the knowledge to design workflows that integrate AI agents, control logic, human input, and data transformation into coherent, maintainable systems. This foundation prepares you to implement and experiment with workflows in hands-on scenarios, giving you the skills to build robust automation solutions with confidence.

 Tip

For more information about workflows in Microsoft Foundry, visit the Microsoft Foundry Create a workflow documentation.

Introduction
Completed
100 XP
2 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
AI agents are transforming how applications interact with users and automate tasks. Unlike traditional programs, AI agents use generative AI to interpret data, make decisions, and complete tasks with minimal human intervention. These agents use large language models to streamline complex workflows, making them ideal for automating business processes.

Developers can build AI agents using different tools, including the Microsoft Agent Framework. This open-source SDK simplifies the integration of AI models into applications. The Microsoft Agent Framework supports different types of agents from multiple providers, including Microsoft Foundry, Azure OpenAI, OpenAI, Microsoft Copilot Studio, and Anthropic agents. This module focuses on Microsoft Foundry Agents, which provide enterprise-grade capabilities using the Microsoft Foundry Agent Service.

Microsoft Foundry Agent Service is a fully managed service that enables developers to securely build, deploy, and scale high-quality extensible AI agents. Using the Foundry Agent Service, developers don't need to manage the underlying compute or storage resources. The Microsoft Agent Framework enables developers to quickly build agents on the Foundry Agent Service, supporting natural language processing and providing access to built-in tools in just a few lines of code.

While Foundry Agent Service provides a powerful foundation for building AI agents, the Microsoft Agent Framework offers more flexibility and scalability. If your solution requires multiple types of agents, using the Microsoft Agent Framework ensures consistency across your implementation. Finally, if you're planning to develop multi-agent solutions, the framework's workflow orchestration features allow you to coordinate collaborative agents efficiently—a topic covered in more detail in a later module.

Suppose you need to develop an AI agent that automatically formats and emails expense reports for employees. Your AI agent can extract data from submitted expense reports, format them correctly, and send them to the appropriate recipients when you use the Microsoft Agent Framework. The tools and functions feature allows your AI agent to interact with APIs, retrieve necessary data, and complete tasks.

In this module, you learn about the core features of the Microsoft Agent Framework SDK. You also learn how to create your own AI agents and extend their capabilities with tool functions.

After completing this module, you're able to:

Use the Microsoft Agent Framework to connect to a Microsoft Foundry project.
Create Microsoft Foundry agents using the Microsoft Agent Framework.
Integrate tool functions with your AI agent.
 Note

We recognize that different people like to learn in different ways. You can choose to complete this module in video-based format or you can read the content as text and images. The text contains greater detail than the videos, so in some cases you might want to refer to it as supplemental material to the video presentation.

Understand Microsoft Agent Framework AI agents
Completed
100 XP
6 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
An AI agent is a program that uses generative AI to interpret data, make decisions, and perform tasks on behalf of users or other applications. AI agents rely on large language models to perform their tasks. Unlike traditional programs, AI agents can function autonomously, handling complex workflows and automating processes without requiring continuous human oversight.

AI Agents can be developed using many different tools and platforms, including the Microsoft Agent Framework. The Microsoft Agent Framework is an open-source SDK that enables developers to easily integrate the latest AI models into their applications. This framework provides a comprehensive foundation for creating functional agents that can use natural language processing to complete tasks and collaborate with other agents.

Microsoft Agent Framework core components
The Microsoft Agent Framework offers different components that can be used individually or combined.

Agents - provides a consistent interface and enables different features like multi-agent orchestration. Out of the box, agents support function calling, multi-turn conversations with chat history, service-provided tools, structured outputs, and streaming responses.

Chat providers - provide abstractions for connecting to AI services from different providers under a common interface. Supported providers include Azure OpenAI, OpenAI, Anthropic, Copilot, and more through the BaseAgent abstraction.

Function tools - containers for custom functions that extend agent capabilities. Agents can automatically invoke functions to integrate with external APIs and services.

Built-in tools - prebuilt capabilities including Code Interpreter for Python execution, File Search for document analysis, and Web Search for internet access.

Conversation management - structured message system with roles (USER, ASSISTANT, SYSTEM, TOOL) and AgentSession for persistent conversation context across interactions.

Workflow orchestration - supports sequential workflows, concurrent execution, group chat, and handoff patterns for complex multi-agent collaboration.

The Microsoft Agent Framework helps streamline the creation of agents and allows multiple agents to work together in conversations while including human input. The framework supports different types of agents from multiple providers, including Microsoft Foundry, Azure OpenAI, OpenAI, Microsoft Copilot Studio, and Anthropic agents.

What Is a Microsoft Foundry Agent?
Microsoft Foundry Agents provide enterprise-level capabilities using the Microsoft Foundry Agent Service. These agents offer advanced features for complex enterprise scenarios. Key benefits include:

Enterprise-level capabilities – Built for Azure environments with advanced AI features including code interpreter, function tools integration, and Model Context Protocol (MCP) support.

Automatic tool invocation – Agents can automatically call and execute tools, integrating seamlessly with Azure AI Search, Azure Functions, and other Azure services.

Thread and conversation management – Provides built-in mechanisms for managing persistent conversation states across sessions, ensuring smooth multi-agent interactions.

Secure enterprise integration – Enables secure and compliant AI agent development with Azure CLI authentication, RBAC, and customizable storage options.

When you use Microsoft Foundry Agents, you get the full power of enterprise Azure capabilities combined with the features of the Microsoft Agent Framework. These features can help you create robust AI-driven workflows that can scale efficiently across business applications.

Agent framework core concepts
BaseAgent - the foundation for all agents with consistent methods, providing a unified interface across all agent types.

Agent session - manage persistent conversation context and store conversation history across sessions using the AgentSession class.

Chat messages - organized structure for agent communication using role-based messaging (USER, ASSISTANT, SYSTEM, TOOL) that enables smooth communication and integration.

Workflow orchestration - supports sequential workflows, running multiple agents in parallel, group conversations between agents, and transferring control between specialized agents.

Multi-modal support - allows agents to work with text, images, and structured outputs, including vision capabilities and type-safe response generation.

Function tools - let you add custom capabilities to agents by including custom functions with automatic schema generation from Python functions.

Authentication methods - supports multiple authentication methods including Azure CLI credentials, API keys, MSAL for Microsoft business authentication, and role-based access control.

This framework supports autonomous, multi-agent AI behaviors while maintaining a flexible architecture that lets you mix and match agents, tools, and workflows as needed. The design lets you switch between OpenAI, Azure OpenAI, Anthropic, and other providers without changing your code, making it easy to build AI systems—from simple chatbots to complex business solutions.

Create an Azure AI agent with Microsoft Agent Framework
Completed
100 XP
7 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Microsoft Foundry Agent is a specialized agent within the Microsoft Agent Framework, designed to provide enterprise-level conversational capabilities with seamless tool integration. It automatically handles tool calling, so you don't need to manually parse and invoke functions. The agent also securely manages conversation history using threads, which reduces the work of maintaining state. The Microsoft Foundry Agent supports many built-in tools, including code interpreter, file search, and web search. It also provides integration capabilities for Azure AI Search, Azure Functions, and other Azure services.

Creating an Azure AI Agent
A Microsoft Foundry Agent includes all the core capabilities you typically need for enterprise AI applications, like function execution, planning, and memory access. This agent acts as a self-contained runtime with enterprise-level features.

To use a Microsoft Foundry Agent:

Create a Microsoft Foundry project.
Add the project connection string to your Microsoft Agent Framework application code.
Set up authentication credentials with AzureCliCredential.
Connect to your project client with the AzureOpenAIResponsesClient class.
Create an Agent instance with the client, instructions, and tools you want to use.
Once your agent is created, you can create a conversation session to interact with your agent and get responses to your questions.

Azure AI Agent key components
The Microsoft Agent Framework Azure AI Agent uses the following components to work:

AzureOpenAIResponsesClient - manages the connection to your Microsoft Foundry project. This client lets you access the services and models associated with your project and provides enterprise-level authentication and security features.

Agent - the main agent class that combines the client, instructions, and tools to create a working AI agent that can handle conversations and complete tasks.

AgentSession - automatically keeps track of conversation history between agents and users, and manages the conversation state. You can create new threads or reuse existing ones to maintain context across interactions.

Tools integration - support for custom functions that extend agent capabilities. Functions are automatically registered and can be called by agents to connect with external APIs and services.

Authentication credentials - supports Azure CLI credentials, service principal authentication, and other Azure identity options for secure access to Foundry Tools.

Thread management - provides flexible options for thread creation, including automatic thread creation for simple scenarios and explicit thread management for ongoing conversations.

These components work together to let you create enterprise-level agents with instructions to define their purpose and get responses from AI models while maintaining security, scalability, and conversation context for business applications.

Add tools to Azure AI agent
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
In the Microsoft Agent Framework, tools allow your AI agent to use existing APIs and services to perform tasks it couldn't do on its own. Tools work through function calling, allowing AI to automatically request and use specific functions. The framework routes the request to the appropriate function in your codebase and returns the results back to the large language model (LLM) so it can generate a final response.

To enable automatic function calling, tools need to provide details that describe how they work. The function's input, output, and purpose should be described in a way that the AI can understand, otherwise, the AI can't call the function correctly.

How to use tools with Microsoft Foundry Agent
The Microsoft Agent Framework supports both custom function tools and built-in tools that are ready to use out of the box.

Built-in tools
Microsoft Foundry Agents come with several built-in tools that you can use immediately:

Code Interpreter - executes Python code for calculations, data analysis, and more
File Search - searches through and analyzes documents
Web Search - retrieves information from the internet
These tools are automatically available and don't require any extra setup.

Custom function tools
When creating custom tools for your Microsoft Foundry Agent, you need to understand several key concepts:

Use the tool decorator

Create a custom function tool by defining a Python function and decorating it with the @tool decorator from the Microsoft Agent Framework. This decorator registers your function as a tool that the AI can call. The @tool decorator includes parameters for providing a name and description for your tool, as well as the approval_mode to specify whether tool calls require approval.

Function definition and annotations

Create your tool by defining a regular Python function with proper type annotations. Use Annotated and Field from Pydantic to provide detailed descriptions that help the AI understand the function's purpose and how to use its parameters. The more descriptive your annotations, the better the AI can understand when and how to call your function.

Adding tools to your agent

Pass your custom functions to the ChatAgent during creation using the tools parameter. You can add a single function or a list of multiple functions. The framework automatically registers these functions and makes them available for the AI to call.

Tool invocation through conversation

Once your tools are registered with the agent, you don't need to manually invoke them. Instead, ask the agent questions or give it tasks that would naturally require your tool's functionality. The AI automatically determines when to call your tools based on the conversation context and the tool descriptions you provided.

Multiple tools and orchestration

You can add multiple tools to a single agent, and the AI automatically chooses which tool to use based on the user's request. The framework handles the orchestration, calling the appropriate functions and combining their results to provide a comprehensive response.

Best practices for tool development
Clear descriptions: Write clear, detailed descriptions for your functions and parameters to help the AI understand their purpose
Type annotations: Use proper Python type hints to specify expected input and output types
Error handling: Implement appropriate error handling in your tool functions to gracefully handle unexpected inputs
Return meaningful data: Ensure your functions return data that the AI can effectively use in its responses
Keep functions focused: Design each tool to handle a specific task rather than trying to do too many things in one function
By following these concepts, you can extend your Microsoft Foundry Agent with both built-in and custom tools, allowing it to interact with APIs and perform advanced tasks. This approach makes your AI more powerful and capable of handling real-world applications efficiently.

In this module, you learned how the Microsoft Agent Framework enables developers to build AI agents. You learned about the components and core concepts of the Microsoft Agent Framework. You also learned how to create custom tools to extend your agent's capabilities. By applying these concepts and skills, you can use the Microsoft Agent Framework to create dynamic, adaptable AI solutions that enhance user interactions and automate complex tasks.

Introduction
Completed
100 XP
2 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
AI agents offer a powerful combination of technologies, able to complete tasks with the use of generative AI. However, in some situations, the task required might be larger than is realistic for a single agent. For those scenarios, consider a multi-agent solution. A multi-agent solution allows agents to collaborate within the same conversation.

Imagine you're trying to address common DevOps challenges such as monitoring application performance, identifying issues, and deploying fixes. A multi-agent system could consist of four specialized agents working collaboratively:

The Monitoring Agent continuously ingests logs and metrics, detects anomalies using natural language processing (NLP), and triggers alerts when issues arise.

The Root Cause Analysis Agent then correlates these anomalies with recent system changes, using machine learning models or predefined rules to pinpoint the root cause of the problem.

Once the root cause is identified, the Automated Deployment Agent takes over to implement fixes or roll back problematic changes by interacting with CI/CD pipelines and executing deployment scripts.

Finally, the Reporting Agent generates detailed reports summarizing the anomalies, root causes, and resolutions, and notifies stakeholders via email or other communication channels.

This modular, scalable, and intelligent multi-agent system streamlines the DevOps process. The agents collaborate to reduce manual intervention and improve efficiency while ensuring timely communication and resolution of issues.

In this module, you'll explore how to use the powerful capabilities of the Microsoft Agent Framework to design and orchestrate intelligent agents that work collaboratively to solve complex problems. You'll also learn about the different types of orchestration patterns available, and use the Microsoft Agent Framework to develop your own AI agents that can collaborate for a multi-agent solution.

After completing this module, you'll be able to:

Build AI agents using the Microsoft Agent Framework SDK
Use tools and plugins with your AI agents
Understand different types of orchestration patterns
Develop multi-agent solutions
 Note

We recognize that different people like to learn in different ways. You can choose to complete this module in video-based format or you can read the content as text and images. The text contains greater detail than the videos, so in some cases you might want to refer to it as supplemental material to the video presentation.

Understand the Microsoft Agent Framework
Completed
100 XP
6 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
The Microsoft Agent Framework is an open-source SDK that enables developers to integrate AI models into their applications. This framework provides comprehensive support for creating AI-powered agents that can work independently or collaborate with other agents to accomplish complex tasks.

What is the Microsoft Agent Framework?
The Microsoft Agent Framework is designed to help developers build AI-powered agents that can process user inputs, make decisions, and execute tasks autonomously by leveraging large language models and traditional programming logic. The framework provides structured components for defining AI-driven workflows, enabling agents to interact with users, APIs, and external services seamlessly.

Core concepts
The Microsoft Agent Framework provides a flexible architecture with the following key components:

Agents

Agents are intelligent, AI-driven entities capable of reasoning and executing tasks. They use large language models, tools, and conversation history to make decisions dynamically and respond to user needs.

Agent orchestration

Multiple agents can collaborate towards a common goal using different orchestration patterns. The Microsoft Agent Framework supports several orchestration patterns with a unified interface for construction and invocation, allowing you to easily switch between patterns without rewriting your agent logic.

The framework includes several core features that power agent functionality:

Chat clients

Chat clients provide abstractions for connecting to AI services from different providers under a common interface. Supported providers include Azure OpenAI, OpenAI, Anthropic, and more through the BaseChatClient abstraction.

Tools and function integration

Tools enable agents to extend their capabilities through custom functions and built-in services. Agents can automatically invoke tools to integrate with external APIs, execute code, search files, or access web information. The framework supports both custom function tools and built-in tools like Code Interpreter, File Search, and Web Search.

Conversation management

Agents can maintain conversation history across multiple interactions using AgentSession, allowing them to track previous interactions and adapt responses accordingly. The structured message system uses roles (USER, ASSISTANT, SYSTEM, TOOL) for persistent conversation context.

Why you should use the Microsoft Agent Framework
The Microsoft Agent Framework offers a robust platform for building intelligent, autonomous, and collaborative AI agents. The framework can integrate agents from multiple sources, including Microsoft Foundry Agent Service, and supports both multi-agent collaboration and human-agent interaction. Agents can work together to orchestrate sophisticated workflows, where each agent specializes in a specific task, such as data collection, analysis, or decision-making. The framework also facilitates human-in-the-loop processes, enabling agents to augment human decision-making by providing insights or automating repetitive tasks. The provider-agnostic design allows you to switch between different AI providers without changing your code, making it suitable for building adaptable AI systems from simple chatbots to complex enterprise solutions.

Understand agent orchestration
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
The Microsoft Agent Framework SDK's agent orchestration framework makes it possible to design, manage, and scale complex multi-agent workflows without having to manually handle the details of agent coordination. Instead of relying on a single agent to manage every aspect of a task, you can combine multiple specialized agents. Each agent with a unique role or area of expertise can collaborate to create systems that are more robust, adaptive, and capable of solving real-world problems collaboratively.

By orchestrating agents together, you can take on tasks that would be too complex for a single agent—from running parallel analyses, to building multi-stage processing pipelines, to managing dynamic, context-driven handoffs between experts.

Why multi-agent orchestration matters
Single-agent systems are often limited in scope, constrained by one set of instructions or a single model prompt. Multi-agent orchestration addresses this limitation by allowing you to:

Assign distinct skills, responsibilities, or perspectives to each agent.
Combine outputs from multiple agents to improve decision-making and accuracy.
Coordinate steps in a workflow so each agent’s work builds on the last.
Dynamically route control between agents based on context or rules.
This approach opens the door to more flexible, efficient, and scalable solutions, especially for real-world applications that require collaboration, specialization, or redundancy.

Understand workflows in the Microsoft Agent Framework
The Microsoft Agent Framework provides workflows — structured sequences of steps used to complete a task. These workflows can include one or more AI agents alongside other components to automate complex operations.

Workflows give developers control over how tasks are executed, enable multi-agent orchestration, and support checkpointing to save and resume workflow states.

Core Components of a Workflow
Executors
Executors are the main workers in a workflow. They receive input messages, perform specific actions, and produce outputs that move the workflow toward completing its goal.
Executors can represent AI agents or custom logic components.

Example: One executor could analyze a travel request, while another books the flight or hotel based on the results.

Edges
Edges define how messages flow between executors, determining the logic and order of execution. The Microsoft Agent Framework supports several types of edges:

Direct Edges: Connect one executor directly to another in sequence.
Example: After an AI agent gathers user input, the next executor processes the booking.*

Conditional Edges: Trigger only when certain conditions are met.
Example: If hotel rooms are unavailable, the workflow branches to an executor that suggests alternative dates or locations.*

Switch-Case Edges: Route messages to different executors based on predefined conditions.
Example: VIP customers might be routed to a premium service executor, while others follow the standard process.*

Fan-Out Edges: Send a single message to multiple executors simultaneously.
Example: One request could be sent to several agents — one checking flights, another checking hotels.*

Fan-In Edges: Combine multiple messages from different executors into one for a final step.
Example: After gathering hotel and flight results, a summary executor compiles them into a single travel itinerary.*

Events
The Microsoft Agent Framework includes built-in events to improve observability and debugging during workflow execution. These events help developers monitor progress, track errors, and analyze system performance.

Event Name	Description
WorkflowStartedEvent	Triggered when workflow execution begins.
WorkflowOutputEvent	Emitted when the workflow produces an output.
WorkflowErrorEvent	Occurs when an error is encountered.
ExecutorInvokeEvent	Fired when an executor starts processing a task.
ExecutorCompleteEvent	Fired when an executor finishes its work.
RequestInfoEvent	Logged when an external request is issued.
Workflows in the Microsoft Agent Framework allow developers to design, monitor, and control how multiple AI agents and logic components interact to complete complex tasks. They bring structure, flexibility, and transparency to agent-driven applications.

Supported orchestration patterns
Microsoft Agent Framework provides several orchestration patterns directly in the SDK, each offering a different approach to coordinating agents. These patterns are designed to be technology-agnostic so you can adapt them to your own domain and integrate them into your existing systems.

Concurrent orchestration - Broadcast the same task to multiple agents at once and collect their results independently. Useful for parallel analysis, independent subtasks, or ensemble decision making.
Sequential orchestration - Pass the output from one agent to the next in a fixed order. Ideal for step-by-step workflows, pipelines, and progressive refinement.
Handoff orchestration - Dynamically transfer control between agents based on context or rules. Great for escalation, fallback, and expert routing where one agent works at a time.
Group chat orchestration - Coordinate a shared conversation among multiple agents (and optionally a human), managed by a chat manager that chooses who speaks next. Best for brainstorming, collaborative problem solving, and building consensus.
Magentic orchestration - A manager-driven approach that plans, delegates, and adapts across specialized agents. Suited to complex, open-ended problems where the solution path evolves.
A unified orchestration workflow
Regardless of which orchestration pattern you choose, the Microsoft Agent Framework SDK provides a consistent, developer-friendly interface for building and running them. The typical flow looks like this:

Define your agents and describe their capabilities.
Select and create an orchestration pattern, optionally adding a manager agent if needed.
Optionally configure callbacks or transforms for custom input and output handling.
Start a runtime to manage execution.
Invoke the orchestration with your task.
Retrieve results in an asynchronous, nonblocking way.
Because all patterns share the same core interface, you can easily experiment with different orchestration strategies without rewriting agent logic or learning new APIs. The SDK abstracts the complexity of agent communication, coordination, and result aggregation so you can focus on designing workflows that deliver results.

Multi-agent orchestration in the Microsoft Agent Framework SDK provides a flexible, scalable way to build intelligent systems that combine the strengths of multiple specialized agents. With built-in orchestration patterns, a unified development model, and runtime features for managing execution, you can quickly prototype, refine, and deploy collaborative AI workflows. The framework provides the tools to turn multiple agents into a cohesive problem-solving team, whether you're running parallel processes, sequential workflows, or dynamic conversations.

Use concurrent orchestration
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Concurrent orchestration lets multiple agents work on the same task at the same time. Each agent handles the task independently, and then their outputs are gathered and combined. This method works especially well when you want diverse approaches or solutions, like during brainstorming, group decision-making, or voting.

Diagram of concurrent orchestration flow.

This pattern is useful when you need different approaches or ideas to solve the same problem. Instead of having agents work one after another, they all work at the same time. This speeds up the process and covers the problem from many angles.

Usually, the results from each agent are combined to create a final answer, but this isn’t always necessary. Each agent can also produce its own separate result, like calling tools to complete tasks or updating different data stores independently.

Agents work on their own and don't share results with each other. However, an agent can call other AI agents by running its own orchestration as part of its process. Agents need to know which other agents are available to work on tasks. This pattern allows you to either call all registered agents every time or choose which agents to run based on the specific task.

When to use concurrent orchestration
You may want to consider using the concurrent orchestration pattern in these situations:

When tasks can run at the same time, either by using a fixed group of agents or by selecting AI agents dynamically based on what the task needs.
When the task benefits from different specialized skills or approaches (for example, technical, business, or creative) that all work independently but contribute to solving the same problem.
This kind of teamwork is common in multi-agent decision-making methods such as:

Brainstorming ideas
Combining different reasoning methods (ensemble reasoning)
Making decisions based on voting or consensus (quorum)
Handling tasks where speed matters and running agents in parallel cuts down wait time
When to avoid concurrent orchestration
You may want to avoid using the concurrent orchestration pattern in the following scenarios:

Agents need to build on each other's work or depend on shared context in a specific order.
The task requires a strict sequence of steps or predictable, repeatable results.
Resource limits, like model usage quotas, make running agents in parallel inefficient or impossible.
Agents can't reliably coordinate changes to shared data or external systems while running at the same time.
There's no clear way to resolve conflicts or contradictions between results from different agents.
Combining results is too complicated or ends up lowering the overall quality.
Implement concurrent orchestration
Implement the concurrent orchestration pattern with the Microsoft Agent Framework:

Create your chat client
Set up a chat client (for example, AzureOpenAIChatClient) with appropriate credentials to connect to your AI service provider.

Define your agents
Create agent instances using the chat client's create_agent method. Each agent should have specific instructions and a name that defines its role and expertise area.

Build the concurrent workflow
Use the ConcurrentBuilder class to create a workflow that can run multiple agents in parallel. Add your agent instances as participants using the participants() method, then call build() to create the workflow.

Run the workflow
Call the workflow's run method with the task or input you want the agents to work on. The workflow runs all agents concurrently and returns events containing the results.

Process the results
Extract the outputs from the workflow events using get_outputs(). The results contain the combined conversations from all agents, with each agent's response included in the final output.

Handle the aggregated responses
Process the aggregated messages from all agents. Each message includes the author name and content, allowing you to identify which agent provided each response.

Concurrent orchestration is a powerful pattern for using multiple AI agents simultaneously, enabling faster and more diverse problem-solving. By running agents in parallel, you can explore different approaches at once, improve efficiency, and gain richer insights. However, it's important to choose this pattern when tasks can truly run independently and to be mindful of resource constraints and coordination challenges. When implemented thoughtfully with the Microsoft Agent Framework SDK, concurrent orchestration can greatly enhance your AI workflows and decision-making processes.

Use sequential orchestration
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
In sequential orchestration, agents are arranged in a pipeline where each agent processes the task one after another. The output from one agent becomes the input for the next. This pattern is ideal for workflows where each step depends on the previous one, such as document review, data transformation pipelines, or multi-stage reasoning.

Diagram that shows sequential orchestration where agents process tasks in a defined pipeline order. Output flows from one agent to the next.

Sequential orchestration works best for tasks that need to be done step-by-step, with each step improving on the last. The order in which agents run is fixed and decided beforehand, and agents don't decide what happens next.

When to use sequential orchestration
Consider using the sequential orchestration pattern when your workflow has:

Processes made up of multiple steps that must happen in a specific order, where each step relies on the one before it.
Data workflows where each stage adds something important that the next stage needs to work properly.
Tasks where stages can't be done at the same time and must run one after another.
Situations that require gradual improvements, like drafting, reviewing, and polishing content.
Systems where you know how each agent performs and can handle delays or failures in any step without stopping the whole process.
When to avoid sequential orchestration
Avoid this pattern when:

Stages can be run independently and in parallel without affecting quality.
A single agent can perform the entire task effectively.
Early stages may fail or produce poor output, and there's no way to stop or correct downstream processing based on errors.
Agents need to collaborate dynamically rather than hand off work sequentially.
The workflow requires iteration, backtracking, or dynamic routing based on intermediate results.
Implement sequential orchestration
Implement the sequential orchestration pattern with the Microsoft Agent Framework SDK:

Create your chat client
Set up a chat client (for example, AzureOpenAIChatClient) with appropriate credentials to connect to your AI service provider.

Define your agents
Create agent instances using the chat client's create_agent method. Each agent should have specific instructions and a name that defines its role and expertise area in the pipeline.

Build the sequential workflow
Use the SequentialBuilder class to create a workflow that executes agents one after another. Add your agent instances as participants using the participants() method, then call build() to create the workflow.

Run the workflow
Call the workflow's run_stream method with the task or input you want the agents to work on. The workflow processes the task through all agents sequentially, with each agent's output becoming input for the next.

Process the workflow events
Iterate through the workflow events using an async loop. Look for WorkflowOutputEvent instances, which contain the results from the sequential processing.

Extract the final conversation
Collect the final conversation from the workflow outputs. The result contains the complete conversation history showing how each agent in the sequence contributed to the final outcome.

Sequential orchestration is ideal when your task requires clear, ordered steps where each agent builds on the previous one's output. This pattern helps improve output quality through stepwise refinement and ensures predictable workflows. When applied thoughtfully with the Microsoft Agent Framework SDK, it enables powerful multi-agent pipelines for complex tasks like content creation, data processing, and more.

Use group chat orchestration
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Group chat orchestration models a collaborative conversation among multiple AI agents, and optionally a human participant. A central chat manager controls the flow, deciding which agent responds next and when to request human input. This pattern is useful for simulating meetings, debates, or collaborative problem-solving.

Diagram that shows group chat orchestration where multiple agents participate in a managed conversation. A central chat manager coordinates the discussion flow.

The group chat pattern works well for scenarios where group discussion or iterative collaboration is key to reaching decisions. It supports different interaction styles, from free-flowing ideation to formal workflows with defined roles and approval steps. Group chat orchestration is also great for human-in-the-loop setups where a human may guide or intervene in the conversation. Typically, agents in this pattern don't directly change running systems—they mainly contribute to the conversation.

When to use group chat orchestration
Consider using group chat orchestration when your scenario involves:

Spontaneous or guided collaboration among agents (and possibly humans)
Iterative maker-checker loops where agents take turns creating and reviewing
Real-time human oversight or participation
Transparent and auditable conversations since all output is collected in a single thread
Common scenarios include:

Creative brainstorming where agents build on each other's ideas
Decision-making that benefits from debate and consensus
Complex problems requiring cross-disciplinary dialogue
Quality control and validation requiring multiple expert perspectives
Content workflows with clear separation between creation and review
When to avoid group chat orchestration
Avoid this pattern when:

Simple task delegation or straightforward linear pipelines suffice
Real-time speed requirements make discussion overhead impractical
Hierarchical or deterministic workflows are needed without discussion
The chat manager can't clearly determine when the task is complete
Managing conversation flow becomes too complex, especially with many agents (limit to three or fewer for easier control)
Maker-checker loops
A common special case is the maker-checker loop. Here, one agent (the maker) proposes content or solutions, and another agent (the checker) reviews and critiques them. The checker can send feedback back to the maker, and this cycle repeats until the result is satisfactory. This process requires a turn-based sequence managed by the chat manager.

Implement group chat orchestration
Implement the group chat orchestration pattern with the Microsoft Agent Framework SDK:

Create your chat client
Set up a chat client (for example, AzureOpenAIChatClient) with appropriate credentials to connect to your AI service provider.

Define your agents
Create agent instances using the chat client's create_agent method. Each agent should have specific instructions and a name that defines its role and expertise area.

Build the group chat workflow
Use the GroupChatBuilder class to create a workflow that can run multiple agents in parallel. Add your agent instances as participants using the participants() method, then call build() to create the workflow.

Run the workflow
Call the workflow's run method with the task or input you want the agents to work on. The workflow runs all agents concurrently and returns events containing the results.

Process the results
Extract the outputs from the workflow events using get_outputs(). The results contain the combined conversations from all agents, with each agent's response included in the final output.

Handle the aggregated responses
Process the aggregated messages from all agents. Each message includes the author name and content, allowing you to identify which agent provided each response.

Customizing the group chat manager
You can create a custom group chat manager by extending the base GroupChatManager class. This approach lets you control:

How conversation results are filtered or summarized
How the next agent is selected
When to request user input
When to terminate the conversation
Custom managers let you implement specialized logic tailored to your use case.

Group chat manager call order
During each round of the conversation, the chat manager calls methods in this order:

should_request_user_input - Checks if human input is needed before the next agent responds.
should_terminate - Determines if the conversation should end (for example, max rounds reached).
filter_results - If ending, summarizes or processes the final conversation.
select_next_agent - If continuing, chooses the next agent to speak.
This ensures user input and termination conditions are handled before moving the conversation forward. Override these methods in your custom manager to change behavior.

Group chat orchestration enables multiple AI agents—and optionally humans—to collaborate through guided conversation and iterative feedback. It's ideal for complex tasks that benefit from diverse expertise and dynamic interaction. While it requires careful management, this pattern offers transparency and flexibility in decision-making and creative workflows. The Microsoft Agent Framework SDK makes it easy to implement and customize group chat orchestration for your needs.

Use handoff orchestration
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Handoff orchestration lets AI agents transfer control to one another based on the task context or user requests. Each agent can "handoff" the conversation to another agent with the right expertise, making sure the best-suited agent handles each part of the task. This pattern is ideal for customer support, expert systems, or any situation where dynamic delegation is needed.

Diagram of handoff orchestration flow.

This pattern fits scenarios where the best agent isn't known upfront or where the task requirements become clearer during processing. Unlike parallel patterns, agents work one at a time, fully handing off control from one to the next.

When to use handoff orchestration
You may want to consider using the handoff orchestration pattern in these scenarios:

Tasks need specialized knowledge or tools, but the number or order of agents can't be determined in advance.
Expertise requirements emerge dynamically during processing, triggering task routing based on content analysis.
Multiple-domain problems require different specialists working sequentially.
You can define clear signals or rules indicating when an agent should transfer control and to whom.
When to avoid handoff orchestration
You may want to avoid using the handoff orchestration pattern in these scenarios:

The involved agents and their order are known upfront and fixed.
Task routing is simple and rule-based, not needing dynamic interpretation.
Poor routing decisions might frustrate users.
Multiple operations must run at the same time.
Avoiding infinite handoff loops or excessive bouncing between agents is difficult.
Implementing handoff orchestration
The handoff orchestration pattern can be implemented in the Microsoft Agent Framework SDK using control workflows. In a control workflow, each agent processes the task in sequence, and based on its output, the workflow decides which agent to call next. This routing is done using a switch-case structure that routes the task to different agents based on classification results.

Set up data models and chat client

Create your chat client for connecting to AI services
Define Pydantic models for AI agents' structured JSON responses
Create simple data classes for passing information between workflow steps
Configure agents with specific instructions and response_format parameter for structured JSON output
Create specialized executor functions

Input storage executor - saves incoming data to shared state and forwards to classification agent
Transformation executor - converts agent's JSON response into typed routing object
Handler executors - separate executors for each classification outcome with guard conditions to verify correct message processing
Build routing logic

Create factory functions that generate condition checkers for each classification value
Design conditions to examine incoming messages and return true for specific classification results
Use conditions with Case objects in switch-case edge groups
Always include a Default case as fallback for unexpected scenarios
Assemble the workflow

Use WorkflowBuilder to connect executors with regular edges
Add switch-case edge group for routing based on classification results
Configure workflow to follow first matching case or fall back to default
Set up terminal executor to yield final output
Handoff orchestration provides a flexible way to route tasks dynamically among specialized AI agents, ensuring that each part of a workflow is handled by the best-suited expert. It works well for complex, evolving tasks like customer support or multi-domain problem solving where expertise needs change during the conversation. When you use the Microsoft Agent Framework SDK, you can build adaptable systems that seamlessly transfer control between agents—and include human input when needed—for smooth and efficient task completion.

Use Magentic orchestration
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Magentic orchestration is a flexible, general-purpose multi-agent pattern designed for complex, open-ended tasks that require dynamic collaboration. This pattern uses a dedicated Magentic manager to coordinate a team of specialized agents. The manager decides which agent should act next based on the evolving context, task progress, and agent capabilities.

Diagram of Magentic orchestration flow.

The Magentic manager maintains a shared context, tracks progress, and adapts the workflow in real time. This approach allows the system to break down complex problems, assign subtasks, and iteratively refine solutions. The process focuses as much on building and documenting the approach as it does on delivering the final solution. A dynamic task ledger is built and refined as the workflow progresses, recording goals, subgoals, and execution plans.

When to use Magentic orchestration
Consider using the Magentic orchestration pattern in these scenarios:

The problem is complex or open-ended with no predetermined solution path.
Input and feedback from multiple specialized agents are needed to shape a valid solution.
The system must generate a documented plan of approach for human review.
Agents have tools that can directly interact with external systems and resources.
A step-by-step, dynamically built execution plan adds value before running the tasks.
When to avoid Magentic orchestration
You may want to avoid this pattern when:

The solution path is fixed or deterministic.
There's no need to produce a ledger or plan of approach.
The task is simple enough for a more lightweight orchestration pattern.
Speed is the priority, as this method emphasizes planning over fast execution.
You expect frequent stalls or loops without a clear resolution path.
Implementing Magentic orchestration
Implement the Magentic orchestration pattern with the Microsoft Agent Framework:

Define specialized agents
Create agent instances (for example, ChatAgent) with specific instructions and chat clients. Each agent should have a specialized role and capabilities suited for different aspects of the complex task.

Set up event handling callback
Define an async callback function to handle different types of events during orchestration, including orchestrator messages, agent streaming updates, agent messages, and final results.

Build the Magentic workflow
Use the MagenticBuilder class to create the orchestration. Add your agent instances as participants, configure the event callback with streaming mode, and set up the standard manager with appropriate parameters like max round count and stall limits.

Configure the standard manager
The standard manager coordinates agent collaboration using a chat client for planning and progress tracking. Configure parameters like maximum round count, stall count, and reset count to control the orchestration behavior.

Run the workflow
Call the workflow's run_stream method with your complex task. The workflow dynamically plans, delegates work to appropriate agents, and coordinates their collaboration to solve the problem.

Process workflow events
Iterate through the workflow events using an async loop. Handle different event types including WorkflowOutputEvent, which contains the final results from the orchestration.

Extract the final result
Collect the final output from the workflow events. The result contains the complete solution developed through the collaborative effort of all participating agents.

Magentic orchestration excels at solving complex, evolving problems that require real-time coordination between specialized agents. It's ideal for tasks where the plan can't be defined in advance and must adapt as new information emerges. Using the Microsoft Agent Framework, you can build systems that dynamically design, refine, and execute solution paths through intelligent agent collaboration.

Summary
Completed
100 XP
2 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
In this module, you explored how to design and manage multi-agent orchestration workflows using the Microsoft Agent Framework SDK. You learned how multi-agent systems provide advantages over single-agent approaches, including improved scalability, specialization, and collaborative problem solving. You also learned several different orchestration patterns—concurrent, sequential, handoff, group chat, and magentic—and reviewed guidance on when and how to use each. You also saw how the SDK provides a unified interface for defining agents, running orchestrations, handling structured data, and retrieving results asynchronously, enabling you to build flexible, reliable, and maintainable multi-agent workflows.

 Tip

For more information about Microsoft Agent Framework SDK, see Microsoft Agent Framework SDK documentation.

Introduction
Completed
100 XP
2 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
AI agents are powerful on their own, but many real-world tasks require collaboration across multiple agents. Coordinating these interactions manually can be complex, especially when agents are remote or distributed.

The Agent-to-Agent (A2A) protocol addresses this challenge by providing a standardized framework for agent discovery, communication, and coordinated task execution. By implementing A2A, you can easily manage connections to remote agents, delegate requests to the appropriate agent, and enable seamless, standardized, and secure communication between agents.

For example, imagine a technical writer who wants to create compelling blog content. One agent generates compelling article headlines, while another creates detailed outlines. Using A2A, a routing agent coordinates the workflow: it sends the user's request to the title agent, passes the generated title to the outline agent, and returns the final outline to the user—all automatically.

In this module, you learn how to implement the A2A protocol with Azure AI Agents. You also practice configuring a routing agent, registering remote agents, and building a coordinated workflow that allows multiple agents to collaborate effectively.

 Note

We recognize that different people like to learn in different ways. You can choose to complete this module in video-based format or you can read the content as text and images. The text contains greater detail than the videos, so in some cases you might want to refer to it as supplemental material to the video presentation.

Define an A2A agent
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
The Agent-to-Agent (A2A) protocol is a standardized way for AI agents to communicate and collaborate with each other. It defines how agents can share context, invoke each other's capabilities, and exchange information securely. By adhering to the A2A protocol, agents from different vendors or platforms can work together seamlessly, enabling more complex and integrated AI solutions.

Before an A2A agent can participate in multi-agent workflows, it needs to explain what it can do. Agent Skills and how other agents or clients can discover those capabilities are exposed through an Agent Card.

Advantages of the Agent-to-Agent (A2A) protocol
The Agent-to-Agent (A2A) protocol offers several advantages for AI agent interactions:

Enhanced Collaboration:
A2A enables agents from different vendors and platforms to share context and work together, allowing seamless automation across systems that are traditionally disconnected.

Flexible Model Selection:
Each A2A agent can choose which large language model (LLM) to use for handling requests, enabling optimized or fine-tuned models per agent, unlike some MCP scenarios that rely on a single LLM connection.

Integrated Authentication:
Authentication is built into the A2A protocol, providing a robust security framework for secure agent-to-agent communication.

Agent Skills
An Agent Skill describes a specific capability or function that the agent can perform. Think of it as a building block that communicates to clients or other agents what tasks the agent is designed to handle.

Key elements of an Agent Skill include:

ID: A unique identifier for the skill.
Name: A human-readable name describing the skill.
Description: A detailed explanation of what the skill does.
Tags: Keywords for categorization and easier discovery.
Examples: Sample prompts or use cases to illustrate the skill in action.
Input/Output Modes: Supported data formats or media types (for example, text, JSON).
When defining a skill for your agent, consider the tasks it should perform, how to describe them clearly, and how other agents or clients might use them. For example, a simple "Hello World" skill could return a basic greeting in text format, whereas a blog-writing skill might accept a topic and return a suggested title or outline.

Agent Card
The Agent Card is like a digital business card for your agent. It's a structured document that a routing agent or client can retrieve to discover your agent’s capabilities and how to interact with it.

Key elements of an Agent Card include:

Identity Information: Name, description, and version of the agent.
Endpoint URL: Where the agent’s A2A service can be accessed.
Capabilities: Supported A2A features such as streaming or push notifications.
Default Input/Output Modes: The primary media types the agent can handle.
Skills: A list of the agent’s skills that other agents can invoke.
Authentication Support: Indicates if the agent requires credentials for access.
When creating an Agent Card, ensure it accurately represents your agent’s skills and endpoints. This allows clients or routing agents to discover the agent, understand what it can do, and interact with it appropriately.

Putting it together
Once an agent defines its skills and publishes an Agent Card:

Other agents or clients can discover the agent automatically.
Requests can be routed to the agent’s appropriate skill.
Responses are returned in supported formats, enabling smooth collaboration across multiple agents.
For example, in a technical writer workflow, one agent could define skills for generating article titles, and another for creating outlines. The routing agent retrieves each agent’s card to discover these capabilities and orchestrates a workflow where a title generated by one agent feeds into the outline agent, producing a cohesive final response.

Implement an agent executor
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
The Agent Executor is a core component of an A2A agent. It defines how your agent processes incoming requests, generates responses, and communicates with clients or other agents. Think of it as the bridge between the A2A protocol and your agent's specific business logic.

Understand the Agent Executor
The AgentExecutor interface handles all incoming requests sent to your agent. It receives information about the request, processes it according to the agent’s capabilities, and sends responses or events back through a communication channel.

Key responsibilities:

Execute tasks requested by users or other agents.
Stream responses or send individual messages back to the client.
Handle task cancellation if supported.
Implement the interface
An Agent Executor typically defines two primary operations:

Execute

Processes incoming requests and generates responses.
Accesses request details (for example, user input, task context).
Sends results back via an event queue, which may include messages, task updates, or artifacts.
Cancel

Handles requests to cancel an ongoing task.
May not be supported for simple agents.
The executor uses the RequestContext to understand the incoming request and an EventQueue to communicate results or events back to the client.

Request handling flow
Consider a "Hello World" agent workflow:

The agent has a small helper class that implements its core logic (for example, returning a string).
The executor receives a request and calls the agent’s logic.
The executor wraps the result as an event and places it on the event queue.
The routing mechanism sends the event back to the requester.
For cancellation, a basic agent might only indicate that cancellation isn't supported.

The Agent Executor is central to making your A2A agent functional. It defines how the agent executes tasks and communicates results, providing a standardized interface for clients and other agents. Properly implemented executors enable seamless integration and collaboration in multi-agent workflows.

Host an A2A server
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Once your agent defines its skills and Agent Card, the next step is to host it on a server. Hosting makes your agent accessible to clients and other agents over HTTP, enabling real-time interactions and multi-agent workflows.

Hosting an agent allows it to:

Expose its capabilities through its Agent Card, which clients and other agents can discover.
Receive incoming A2A requests and forward them to your Agent Executor for processing.
Manage task lifecycles, including streaming responses and stateful interactions.
Effectively, the server acts as a bridge between your agent’s logic and the external world, ensuring it can participate in coordinated workflows.

Core components of the agent server
To host an agent, you need three essential components working together:

Agent Card

Describes the agent’s capabilities, skills, and input/output modes.
Exposed at a standard endpoint (typically /.well-known/agent-card.json) so clients and other agents can discover your agent.
Can include multiple versions or an "extended" card for authenticated users.
Request Handler

Routes incoming requests to the appropriate methods on your Agent Executor (for example, execute or cancel).
Manages the task lifecycle using a Task Store, which tracks tasks, streaming data, and resubscriptions.
Even simple agents require a task store to handle interactions reliably.
Server Application

Built using a web framework (Starlette in Python) to handle HTTP requests.
Combined with an ASGI server (like Uvicorn) to start listening on a network interface and port.
Exposes the agent card and request handler endpoints, enabling clients to interact with your agent.
Set up the A2A agent server
Define your agent’s skills and Agent Card.
Initialize a request handler that links your Agent Executor with a Task Store.
Set up the server application, providing the Agent Card and request handler.
Start the server using an ASGI server (Uvicorn) to make it accessible on the network.
Once running, the agent listens for incoming requests and responds according to its defined skills.
A "Hello World" agent may expose a basic greeting skill. Once hosted, it can respond to any requests sent to its endpoint. A more complex agent can serve multiple skills or an extended Agent Card for authenticated users.

Hosting an A2A agent combines the Agent Card, request handler, and agent executor to make it available for client and agent interactions. This setup ensures tasks are managed correctly and responses are delivered reliably, enabling your agent to participate in multi-agent workflows.

Connect to your A2A agent
Completed
100 XP
5 minutes
Choose your preferred content format
Once your A2A agent server is running, the next step is understanding how a client can interact with it. A client acts as the bridge between your application and the agent server.

The client responsibilities include:

Discovering the Agent Card, which contains metadata about the agent and its endpoints.
Sending requests to the agent for processing.
Receiving and interpreting the agent's responses, which can be either direct messages or task-based results.
Connect to your agent server
The client must know the base URL of the server.
The client typically retrieves the Agent Card from a well-known endpoint on the server.
Once the Agent Card is obtained, the client can be initialized with it, establishing a connection ready to send messages.
Send requests to the agent
There are two main types of requests a client can make:

Non-Streaming Requests: The client sends a message and waits for a complete response. This type of request is suitable for simple interactions or when a single response is expected.
Streaming Requests: The client sends a message and receives responses incrementally as the agent processes the request. This type of request is useful for long-running tasks or when you want to update the user in real-time.
In both cases, requests usually include a role (fo example, user) and the message content. More complex agents may return task objects instead of immediate messages, allowing for task tracking or cancellation.

Handle the agent response
Agent responses may include:

Direct messages: Immediate outputs from the agent, such as text or structured content.
Task-based responses: Objects representing ongoing tasks, which may require follow-up calls to check status or retrieve results.
Clients should be prepared to handle both response types and interpret the returned data appropriately.

Interacting with the agent
Each request should be uniquely identifiable, often using a generated ID.
Streaming responses are asynchronous and may provide partial results before the final output.
Simple agents may return messages directly, while more advanced agents may manage multiple tasks simultaneously.
Connecting a client to your agent server involves fetching the Agent Card, establishing a connection, sending requests, and handling responses. By grasping these core concepts, you can confidently interact with your remote agent, whether you're sending simple messages or managing complex tasks.

Summary
Completed
100 XP
1 minute
Choose your preferred content format
In this module, you learned how to connect Python clients to Azure AI Agents using the Agent-to-Agent (A2A) protocol.

By running an A2A server and connecting your client, you explored how agents are discovered and communicated with dynamically using the Agent Card. You learned about executors, which handle agent requests, and how messages—both streaming and non-streaming—flow between clients and agents. Understanding these concepts allows you to build flexible, discoverable agent networks that can delegate tasks and respond to requests across distributed environments.
